# W65C816S

# 8/ 16 – bit Microprocessor

### WDC reserves the right to make changes at any time without notice in order to improve design and supply

### the best possible product. Information contained herein is provided gratuitously and without liability, to any

### user. Reasonable efforts have been made to verify the accuracy of the information but no guarantee

### whatsoever is given as to the accuracy or as to its applicability to particular uses. In every instance, it must

### be the responsibility of the user to determine the suitability of the products for each application. WDC

### products are not authorized for use as critical components in life support devices or systems. Nothing

### contained herein shall be construed as a recommendation to use any product in violation of existing patents

### or other rights of third parties. The sale of any WDC product is subject to all WDC Terms and Conditions of

### Sales and Sales Policies, copies of which are available upon request.

### Copyright (C) 1981- 2024 by The Western Design Center, Inc. All rights reserved, including the right of

### reproduction in whole or in part in any form.


## TABLE OF CONTENTS



- 1 INTRODUCTION
   - 1.1 Features of the W65C816S
- 2 W65C816S FUNCTIONAL DESCRIPTION
   - 2.1 Instruction Register (IR)
   - 2.2 Timing Control Unit (TCU)
   - 2.3 Arithmetic and Logic Unit (ALU)................................................................................................
   - 2.4 Accumulator (A)
   - 2.5 Data Bank Register (DBR)
   - 2.6 Direct (D)
   - 2.7 Index (X and Y)
   - 2.8 Processor Status Register (P)
   - 2.9 Program Bank Register (PBR)
   - 2.10 Program Counter (PC)
   - 2.11 Stack Pointer (S)
   - 2.12 Pin Function Description
   - 2.13 Abort (ABORTB)
   - 2.14 Address Bus (A0-A15)
   - 2.15 Bus Enable (BE)
   - 2.16 Data/Bank Address Bus (D0-D7)
   - 2.17 Emulation Status (E)
   - 2.18 Interrupt Request (IRQB)
   - 2.19 Memory Lock (MLB)
   - 2.20 Memory/Index Select Status (MX)
   - 2.21 Non-Maskable Interrupt (NMIB)
   - 2.22 Phase 2 In (PHI2)
   - 2.23 Read/Write (RWB)
   - 2.24 Ready (RDY)...............................................................................................................................
   - 2.25 Reset (RESB)
   - 2.26 Valid Data Address (VDA) and Valid Program Address (VPA)
   - 2.27 VDD and VSS
   - 2.28 Vector Pull (VPB)
- 3 ADDRESSING MODES
   - 3.1 Reset and Interrupt Vectors
   - 3.2 Stack
   - 3.3 Direct
   - 3.4 Program Address Space
   - 3.5 Data Address Space
      - 3.5.1 Absolute-a
      - 3.5.2 Absolute Indexed Indirect-(a,x)
      - 3.5.3 Absolute Indexed with X-a,x
      - 3.5.4 Absolute Indexed with Y-a,y
      - 3.5.5 Absolute Indirect-(a)
      - 3.5.6 Absolute Long Indexed With X-al,x
      - 3.5.7 Absolute Long-al
      - 3.5.8 Accumulator-A
      - 3.5.9 Block Move-xyc
      - 3.5.10 Direct Indexed Indirect-(d,x)
      - 3.5.11 Direct Indexed with X-d,x
      - 3.5.12 Direct Indexed with Y-d,y
      - 3.5.13 Direct Indirect Indexed-(d),y
      - 3.5.14 Direct Indirect Long Indexed-[d],y
      - 3.5.15 Direct Indirect Long-[d]
      - 3.5.16 Direct Indirect-(d)
      - 3.5.17 Direct-d
      - 3.5.18 Immediate-#
      - 3.5.19 Implied-i
      - 3.5.20 Program Counter Relative Long-rl
      - 3.5.21 Program Counter Relative-r
      - 3.5.22 Stack-s
      - 3.5.23 Stack Relative-d,s
      - 3.5.24 Stack Relative Indirect Indexed-(d,s),y....................................................................................
- 4 TIMING, AC AND DC CHARACTERISTICS
   - 4.1 Absolute Maximum Ratings
   - 4.2 DC Characteristics TA = - 40 ° C to +85 ° C
- 5 OPERATION TABLES...........................................................................................
- 6 RECOMMENDED W65C816S ASSEMBLER SYNTAX STANDARDS
   - 6.1 Directives
   - 6.2 Comments
   - 6.3 The Source Line
      - 6.3.1 The Label Field
      - 6.3.2 The Operation Code Field
      - 6.3.3 The Operand Field
      - 6.3.4 Comment Field
- 7 Caveats
   - 7.1 Stack Addressing
   - 7.2 Direct Addressing
   - 7.3 Absolute Indexed Addressing
   - 7.4 ABORTB Input
   - 7.5 VDA and VPA Valid Memory Address Output Signals
   - 7.6 DB/BA operation when RDY is Pulled Low
   - 7.7 MX Output
   - 7.8 All Opcodes Function in All Modes of Operation
   - 7.9 Indirect Jumps
   - 7.10 Switching Modes
   - 7.11 How Interrupts Affect the Program Bank and the Data Bank Registers
   - 7.12 Binary Mode
   - 7.13 Wait for Interrupt (WAI) Instruction
   - 7.14 Stop-the-Clock (STP) Instruction
   - 7.15 Co-Processor (COP) Signatures
   - 7.16 WDM Opcode Use
   - 7.17 RDY Pulled During Write
   - 7.18 MVN and MVP Affects on the Data Bank Register
   - 7.19 Interrupt Priorities
   - 7.20 Transfers from 8-Bit to 16-Bit, or 16-Bit to 8-Bit Registers
   - 7.21 Stack Transfers
   - 7.22 BRK Instruction
   - 7.23 Accumulator switching from 8-bit to 16-bit
- 8 HARD CORE MODEL
   - 8.1 W65C816 Core Information
- 9 SOFT CORE RTL MODEL
   - 9.1 W65C816 Synthesizable RTL-Code in Verilog HDL
- 10 ORDERING INFORMATION
- Table 2-1 W65C816S Microprocessor Programming Model Table of Tables
- Table 2-2 Pin Function Table
- Table 3-1 Addressing Mode Summary
- Table 4-1 Absolute Maximum Ratings
- Table 4-2 W65C816S AC Characteristics
- Table 5-1 W65C816S Instruction Set-Alphabetical Sequence
- Table 5-2 Emulation Mode Vector Locations (8-bit Mode)
- Table 5-3 Native Mode Vector Locations (16-bit Mode)
- Table 5-4 Opcode Matrix
- Table 5-5 Operation, Operation Codes, and Status Register
- Table 6-1 Alternate Mnemonics
- Table 6-2 Address Mode Formats
- Table 6-3 Byte Selection Operator
- Table 7-1 Caveats
- Figure 2-1 W65C816S Internal Architecture Simplified Block Diagram Table of Figures
- Figure 2-2 W65C816S 40 Pin DIP Pinout
- Figure 2-3 W65C816S 44 Pin PLCC Pinout
- Figure 2-4 W65C816S 44 PIN QFP Pinout
- Figure 4-1 General Timing Diagram
- Figure 5- 1 Bank Address Latching Circuit


## 1 INTRODUCTION

### The W65C816S is a low power cost sensitive 8/ 16 - bit microprocessor. The variable length instruction set

### and manually optimized core size makes the W65C816S an excellent choice for low power System-on-Chip

### (SoC) designs. The Verilog RTL model is available for ASIC design flows. WDC, a Fabless Semiconductor

### Company, provides packaged chips for evaluation or volume production. To aid in system development,

### WDC provides a Professional Software Development Kit (ProSDK) that is available for free download on a

### trial basis, see http://www.westerndesigncenter.com for more information.

### The WDC W65C816S is a fully static CMOS 16-bit microprocessor featuring software compatibility* with the

### 8 - bit NMOS and CMOS 6500-series predecessors. The W65C816S extends addressing to a full 16

### megabytes. These devices offer the many advantages of CMOS technology, including increased noise

### immunity, higher reliability, and greatly reduced power requirements. A software switch determines whether

### the processor is in the 8-bit "emulation" mode, or in the native mode, thus allowing existing systems to use

### the expanded features.

### As shown in the W65C816S Processor Programming Model, Table 2- 1 , the Accumulator, ALU, X and Y

### Index registers, and Stack Pointer register have all been extended to 16 bits. A new 16-bit Direct Page

### register augments the Direct Page addressing mode (formerly Zero Page addressing). Separate Program

### Bank and Data Bank registers provide 24-bit memory addressing with segmented or linear addressing.

### Four new signals provide the system designer with many options. The ABORTB input can interrupt the

### currently executing instruction without modifying internal register, thus allowing virtual memory system

### design. Valid Data Address (VDA) and Valid Program Address (VPA) outputs facilitate dual cache memory

### by indicating whether a data segment or program segment is accessed. Modifying a vector is made easy by

### monitoring the Vector Pull (VPB) output.

### 1.1 Features of the W65C816S

### • Advanced fully static CMOS design for low power

### consumption and increased noise immunity

### • Wide operating voltage range, 1.8+/- 5%, 2.5+/-

### 5%, 3.0+/- 5%, 3.3+/- 10%, 5.0+/- 5% specified for

### use with advanced low voltage peripherals

### • Emulation mode allows complete hardware and

### software compatibility with 65xx designs

### • 24 - bit address bus provides access to 16 MBytes

### of memory space

### • Full 16-bit ALU, Accumulator, Stack Pointer and

### Index Registers

### • Valid Data Address (VDA) and Valid Program

### Address (VPA) output for dual cache and cycle steal

### DMA implementation

### • Vector Pull (VPB) output indicates when interrupt

### vectors are being addressed

### • Abort (ABORTB) input and associated vector

### supports processor repairs of bus error conditions

### • Low power consumption (300uA@1MHz)

### • Separate program and data bank registers allow

### program segmentation or full 16 MByte linear

### addressing

### • New Direct Register and stack relative addressing

### provides capability for re-entrant, re-cursive and re-

### locatable programming

### • 24 addressing modes - 13 original W 65 C 02 S

### modes with 92 instructions using 256 opcodes

### • Wait for Interrupt (WAI) and Stop-the-Clock (STP)

### instructions further reduce power consumption,

### decrease interrupt latency and allows synchronization

### with external events

### • Co-Processor (COP) instruction with associated

### vector supports co-processor configurations, i.e.,

### floating point processors

### • Block move ability

*Except for the BBRx, BBSx, RMBx, and SMBx bit manipulation instructions which do not exist for the

W65C816S


## 2 W65C816S FUNCTIONAL DESCRIPTION

### The W65C816S provides the design engineer with upward software compatibility from 8-bit W65C02S in

### applications to 16-bit system application. In Emulation mode, the W65C816S offers many advantages,

### including full software compatibility with W 65 C 02 S coding.

### Internal organization of the W65C816S can be divided into two parts: 1) The Register Section and 2) The

### Control Section. Instructions obtained from program memory are executed by implementing a series of data

### transfers within the Register Section. Signals that cause data transfers to be executed are generated within

### the Control Section. The W65C816S has a 16-bit internal bus architecture with an 8-bit external data bus

### and 24-bit external address bus.

### 2.1 Instruction Register (IR)

### An Operation Code enters the processor on the Data Bus, and is latched into the IR during the opcode fetch

### cycle. This opcode is then decoded, along with timing and interrupt signals, to generate various IR control

### signals for use during instruction operations.

### 2.2 Timing Control Unit (TCU)

### The Timing Control Unit keeps track of each instruction cycle as it is executed. The TCU is set to zero each

### time an instruction fetch is executed, and is advanced at the beginning of each cycle for as many cycles as

### is required to complete the instruction. Each data transfer between registers depends upon decoding the

### contents of both the Instruction Register and the Timing Control Unit.

### 2.3 Arithmetic and Logic Unit (ALU)................................................................................................

### All Arithmetic and Logic Unit operations take place within the 16-bit ALU. In addition to data operations, the

### ALU also calculates the effective address for relative and indexed addressing modes. The result of a data

### operation is stored in either memory or an internal register. Carry, Negative, Overflow and Zero flags may

### be updated following the ALU data operation.

### 2.4 Accumulator (A)

### The Accumulator is a general purpose register which contains one of the operands and the result of most

### arithmetic and logical operations. In the Native mode (E=0), when the Accumulator Select Bit (M) equals

### zero, the Accumulator is established as 16 bits wide (A, B=C). When the Accumulator Select Bit (M) equals

### one, the Accumulator is 8 bits wide (A). In this case, the upper 8 bits (B) may be used for temporary storage

### in conjunction with the Exchange Accumulator (XBA) instruction.

### 2.5 Data Bank Register (DBR)

### During modes of operation, the 8-bit Data Bank Register holds the bank address for memory transfers. The

### 24 - bit address is composed of the 16-bit instruction effective address and the 8-bit Data Bank address. The

### register value is multiplexed with the data value and is present on the Data/Address lines during the first half

### of a data transfer memory cycle for the W65C816S. The DBR is initialized to zero during Reset.


### 2.6 Direct (D)

### The 16-bit Direct Register provides an address offset for all instructions using direct addressing. The

### effective Direct Address is formed by adding the 8-bit instruction Direct Address field to the Direct Register.

### The Direct Register is initialized to zero during Reset. The bank address for Direct Addressing is always

### zero

### 2.7 Index (X and Y)

### There are two general purpose registers that are commonly referred to as Index Registers (X and Y) and

### are frequently used as an index value for calculation of the effective address. When executing an

### instruction with indexed addressing, the microprocessor fetches the opcode and the base address, and then

### modifies the address by adding an Index Register contents to the address prior to performing the desired

### operation. Pre-indexing or post-indexing of indirect addresses may be selected. In the Native mode (E=0),

### both Index Registers are 16 bits wide where the Index Select Bit (X) of the Processor Status (P) register

### equals zero. If the Index Select Bit (X) equals one, both registers will be 8 bits wide, and the high byte is

### forced to zero.

### 2.8 Processor Status Register (P)

### The 8-bit Processor Status Register contains status flags and mode select bits. The Carry (C), Negative

### (N), Overflow (V), and Zero (Z) status flags serve to report the status of most ALU operations. These status

### flags are tested by use of Conditional Branch instructions. The Decimal (D), IRQ Disable (I),

### Memory/Accumulator (M), and Index (X) bits are used as mode select flags. These flags are set by the

### program to change microprocessor operations.

### The Emulation (E) select and the Break (B) flags are accessible only through the Processor Status Register.

### The Emulation mode select flag is selected by the Exchange Carry and Emulation Bits (XCE) instruction.

### Table 8-1, W65C816S Compatibility Information, illustrates the features of the Native (E=0) and Emulation

### (E=1) modes. The M and X flags are always equal to one in Emulation mode. When an interrupt occurs

### during Emulation mode, the Break flag is written to stack memory as bit 4 of the Processor Status Register.

### 2.9 Program Bank Register (PBR)

### The 8-bit Program Bank Register holds the bank address for all instruction fetches. The 24-bit address

### consists of the 16-bit instruction effective address and the 8-bit Program Bank address. The register value

### is multiplexed with the data bus and presented on the Data bus lines during the first half of a program

### memory cycle. The Program Bank Register is initialized to zero during Reset. The PHK instruction pushes

### the PBR register onto the Stack.

### 2.10 Program Counter (PC)

### The 16-bit Program Counter Register provides the addresses which are used to step the microprocessor

### through sequential 8-bit program instruction fields. The PC is incremented for each 8-bit instruction field that

### is fetched from program memory.

### 2.11 Stack Pointer (S)

### The Stack Pointer is a 16-bit register which is used to indicate the next available location in the stack

### memory area. It serves as the effective address in stack addressing modes as well as subroutine and

### interrupt processing. The Stack Pointer provides simple implementation of nested subroutines and multiple-

### level interrupts. During Emulation mode, the S High-order byte (SH) is always equal to one. The bank

### address for all stack operations is Bank zero.


```
INTERUPT
LOGIC VDD
VSS
```
```
ABORTB
IRQB
NMIB
RESB
```
```
TIMING
CONT.
```
```
RDY
```
```
CLOCK
GEN-
ERATOR
```
```
PHI 2
```
```
IN
```
```
S
TR
```
```
U
```
```
C
TI
```
```
O
```
```
N
D
```
```
E
C
O
D
E
```
```
M
```
```
IN
```
```
TE
```
```
R
M
```
```
S
```
```
IN
```
```
S
TR
```
```
U
C
TI
```
```
O
```
```
N
D
```
```
E
C
O
D
```
```
E^
```
```
S
U
M
```
```
O
```
```
F^
```
```
M
```
```
IN
```
```
TE
```
```
R
M
```
```
S
```
```
R
E
G
IS
```
```
T
ER
```
```
T
```
```
R
A
N
S
FE
```
```
R
L
```
```
O
G
```
```
IC
```
```
S
```
```
T
```
```
S
```
```
T
```
```
E
```
```
M
```
```
C
```
```
O
```
```
N
```
```
T
```
```
R
```
```
O
```
```
L
```
```
RWB
```
```
VPA
```
```
VDA
MLB
```
```
VPB
```
```
E
```
```
MX
```
```
PROCESSOR
STATUS (P)
( 8 BITS)
```
```
INSTRUCTION REGISTER
( 8 BITS)
```
```
IN
```
```
TE
```
```
R
N
A
L^
```
```
D
A
TA
```
```
B
```
```
U
S^
```
```
(^1
```
```
6
```
```
BI
```
```
T
S
)
```
```
DATA
LATCH/
PREDECODER
```
```
IN
```
```
TE
```
```
R
N
```
```
AL
```
```
S
```
```
P
EC
```
```
IA
```
```
L^
```
```
B
U
S
(^1
```
```
6
```
```
B
IT
```
```
S
)
```
```
DATA BANK (DBR)
( 8 BITS)
```
```
PROG. BANK (PBR)
( 8 BITS)
```
```
DIRECT (D)
( 16 BITS)
```
```
PROG. COUNTER
(PC) ( 16 BITS)
```
```
ACCUMULATOR
(C) ( 16 BITS)
(A) ( 8 BITS)
(B) ( 8 BITS)
```
```
TRANSFER
SWITCHES
```
```
ALU
( 16 BITS)
```
```
STACK POINTER
(S) ( 16 BITS)
```
```
INDEX Y
( 16 BITS)
```
```
INDEX X
( 16 BITS)
```
```
A
D
D
R
```
```
ES
```
```
S
B
```
```
U
```
```
FF
```
```
E
R
(
LO
```
```
W
```
```
)
```
```
A
D
R
E
SS
```
```
B
```
```
U
FF
```
```
E
R
(H
```
```
IG
```
```
H
)
```
```
D
A
TA
```
```
B
```
```
U
```
```
S/
```
```
B
A
N
K
A
```
```
D
D
R
E
SS
```
```
B
```
```
U
FF
```
```
ER
```
```
IN
```
```
T
E
R
N
A
L^
```
```
AD
```
```
D
```
```
R
ES
```
```
S
B
```
```
U
S
(^1
```
```
6
```
```
B
IT
```
```
S
)
```
```
A 0 - A 7
```
```
A 8 - A 15
```
D 0 - D 7

```
BE
```
### Figure 2 - 1 W65C816S Internal Architecture Simplified Block Diagram


### Table 2 - 1 W65C816S Microprocessor Programming Model

(^)
8 Bits 8 Bits 8 Bits
X Register (XL)
Y Register (YL)
Stack Register (SL)
Accumulator (A)
Counter (PCL)
X Register (XH)
Stack Register (SH)
Y Register (YH)
Accumulator (B)
Program (PCH)
Direct Register (DH) Direct Register (DL)
Data Bank Register (DBR)
Data Bank Register (DBR)
00
Program Bank Register (PBR)
00
Shaded Blocks = 6502 registers
N V M X D I Z C
1 B BRK^ Bit^1 =BRK^0 =IRQ E
Carry 1 =true
Zero 1 =result zero
IRQ disable 1 =disable
Decimal mode 1 =true
Index Register Select 1 = 8 - bit, 0 = 16 - bit
Memory Select 1 = 8 - bit, 0 = 16 - bit
Overflow 1 =true
Negative 1 =negative
Emulation
1 =W 65 C 02 Emulation Mode

### 0 =Native Mode


##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

##### 10

##### 11

##### 12

##### 13

##### 14

##### 15

##### 16

##### 17

##### 18

##### 19

##### 20

##### 40

##### 39

##### 38

##### 37

##### 36

##### 35

##### 34

##### 33

##### 32

##### 31

##### 30

##### 29

##### 28

##### 27

##### 26

##### 25

##### 24

##### 23

##### 22

##### 21

##### VPB

##### RDY

##### ABORT

##### IRQB

##### MLB

##### NMIB

##### VPA

##### VDD

##### A 0

##### A 1

##### A 2

##### A 3

##### A 4

##### A 5

##### A 6

##### A 7

##### A 8

##### A 9

##### A 10

##### A 11

##### RESB

##### VDA

##### MX

##### PHI 2

##### BE

##### E

##### RWB

##### D 0

##### D 1

##### D 2

##### D 3

##### D 4

##### D 5

##### D 6

##### D 7

##### A 15

##### A 14

##### A 13

##### A 12

##### VSS

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

##### 10

##### 11

##### 12

##### 13

##### 14

##### 15

##### 16

##### 17

##### 18

##### 19

##### 20

##### 40

##### 39

##### 38

##### 37

##### 36

##### 35

##### 34

##### 33

##### 32

##### 31

##### 30

##### 29

##### 28

##### 27

##### 26

##### 25

##### 24

##### 23

##### 22

##### 21

W 6 5 C 8 1 6 S

### 2.12 Pin Function Description

## Figure 2-2 W65C816S 40 Pin DIP Pinout

## Figure 2-3 W65C816S 44 Pin PLCC Pinout

### W 65 C 816 S

```
6543214443424140
```
```
1819202122232425262728
```
```
NMIB
VPA
VDD
A 0
A 1
NC
A 2
A 3
A 4
A 5
A 6
```
```
M
```
```
LB
IR
```
```
Q
B
A
B
O
```
```
R
TB
```
```
R
```
```
D
Y
V
P
B
V
S
S
R
```
```
ES
```
```
B
V
D
A
M
```
```
X
P
H
I^2
B
E
```
```
E
RWB
VDD
D 0
D 1
D 2
D 3
D 4
D 5
D 6
D 7
```
```
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
```
```
39
38
37
36
35
34
33
32
31
30
29
```
```
A
7
A
8
A
9
A^1
```
```
0
A^1
```
```
1
V
S
S
V
S
S
A^1
```
```
2
A^1
```
```
3
A^1
```
```
4
A^1
```
```
5
```

### W 65 C 816 S

##### 4

##### 4

##### 4

##### 3

##### 4

##### 2

##### 4

##### 1

##### 4

##### 0

##### 3

##### 9

##### 3

##### 8

##### 3

##### 7

##### 3

##### 6

##### 3

##### 5

##### 3

##### 4

##### 1

##### 2

##### 1

##### 3

##### 1

##### 4

##### 1

##### 5

##### 1

##### 6

##### 1

##### 7

##### 1

##### 8

##### 1

##### 9

##### 2

##### 0

##### 2

##### 1

##### 22

##### NMIB

##### VPA

##### VDD

##### A 0

##### A 1

##### NC

##### A 2

##### A 3

##### A 4

##### A 5

##### A 6

##### M

##### LB

##### IR

##### Q

##### B

##### A

##### B

##### O

##### R

##### TB

##### R

##### D

##### Y

##### V

##### P

##### B

##### V

##### S

##### S

##### R

##### E

##### S

##### B

##### V

##### D

##### A

##### M

##### X

##### P

##### H

##### I^2

##### B

##### E

##### E

##### RWB

##### VDD

##### D 0

##### D 1

##### D 2

##### D 3

##### D 4

##### D 5

##### D 6

##### D 7

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

##### 10

##### 11

##### 33

##### 32

##### 31

##### 30

##### 29

##### 28

##### 27

##### 26

##### 25

##### 24

##### 23

##### A

##### 7

##### A

##### 8

##### A

##### 9

##### A

##### 10

##### A

##### 11

##### V

##### S

##### S

##### V

##### S

##### S

##### A

##### 12

##### A

##### 13

##### A

##### 14

##### A

##### 15

## Figure 2-4 W65C816S 44 PIN QFP Pinout


## Table 2-2 Pin Function Table

### Pin Description

### A0-A15 Address Bus

### ABORTB Abort Input

### BE Bus Enable

### PHI2 Phase 2 In Clock

### D0-D7 Data Bus/Bank Address Bus

### E Emulation OR Native Mode Select

### IRQB Interrupt Request

### MLB Memory Lock

### MX Memory and Index Register Mode Select^

### NC No Connect

### NMIB Non-Maskable Interrupt

### RDY Ready

### RESB Reset

### RWB Read/Write

### VDA Valid Data Address

### VPB Vector Pull

### VPA Valid Program Address

### VDD Positive Power Supply

### VSS Internal Logic Ground

### 2.13 Abort (ABORTB)

### The Abort negative pulse active input is used to abort instructions (usually due to an Address Bus

### condition). A negative transition will inhibit modification of any internal register during the current

### instruction. Upon completion of this instruction, an interrupt sequence is initiated. The location of the

### aborted opcode is stored as the return address in stack memory. The Abort vector address is 00FFF8,

### (Emulation mode) or 00FFE8,9 (Native mode). Note that ABORTB is a pulse sensitive signal; i.e., an

### abort will occur whenever there is a negative pulse (or level) on the ABORTB pin during a PHI2 clock.

### 2.14 Address Bus (A0-A15)

### The sixteen Address Bus output lines along with the bank address (multiplexed on the first half cycle of the

### Data Bus (D0-D7) pins) form the 24-bit Address Bus for memory and I/O exchange on the Data Bus. When

### using the W65C816S, the address lines may be set to the high impedance state by the Bus Enable (BE)

### signal.

### 2.15 Bus Enable (BE)

### The Bus Enable input signal allows external control of the Address and Data Buffers, as well as the RWB

### signal. With Bus Enable high, the RWB and Address Buffers are active. The Data/Address Buffers are

### active during the first half of every cycle and the second half of a write cycle. When BE is low, these buffers

### are disabled. Bus Enable is an asynchronous signal.


### 2.16 Data/Bank Address Bus (D0-D7)

### The Data/Bank Address Bus pins provide both the Bank Address and Data. The bank address is present

### during the first half of a memory cycle, and the data value is read or written during the second half of the

### memory cycle. Two memory cycles are required to transfer 16-bit values. These lines may be set to the

### high impedance state by the Bus Enable (BE) signal.

### 2.17 Emulation Status (E)

### The Emulation Status output reflects the state of the Emulation (E) mode flag in the Processor Status (P)

### Register. This signal may be thought of as an opcode extension and used for memory and system

### management.

### 2.18 Interrupt Request (IRQB)

### The Interrupt Request negative level active input signal is used to request that an interrupt sequence be

### initiated. When the IRQB Disable flag is cleared, a low input logic level initiates an interrupt sequence after

### the current instruction is completed. The Wait for Interrupt (WAI) instruction may be executed to ensure the

### interrupt will be recognized immediately. The Interrupt Request vector address is 00FFFE, F (Emulation

### mode) or 00FFEE,F (Native mode). Since IRQB is a level sensitive input, an interrupt will occur if the

### interrupt source was not cleared since the last interrupt. Also, no interrupt will occur if the interrupt source is

### cleared prior to interrupt recognition. The IRQB signal going low causes 4 bytes of information to be pushed

### onto the stack before jumping to the interrupt handler. The first byte is PBR followed by PCH, PCL and P

### (Processor Status Register). These register values are used by the RTI instruction to return the processor

### to its original state prior to handling the IRQ interrupt (see Table 6-1)

### 2.19 Memory Lock (MLB)

### The Memory Lock active low output may be used to ensure the integrity of Read Modify Write instructions in

### a multiprocessor system. Memory Lock indicates the need to defer arbitration of the next bus cycle.

### Memory Lock is low during the last three or five cycles of ASL, DEC, INC, LSR, ROL, ROR, TRB, and TSB

### memory referencing instructions, depending on the state of the M flag.

### 2.20 Memory/Index Select Status (MX)

### The Memory/Index Select Status multiplexed output reflects the state of the Accumulator (M) and Index (X)

### elect flags (bits 5 and 4 of the Processor Status (P) Register. Flag M is valid during PHI2 negative transition

### and Flag X is valid during PHI2 positive transition. These bits may be thought of as opcode extensions and

### may be used for memory and system management.


### 2.21 Non-Maskable Interrupt (NMIB)

### A negative transition on the non-maskable Interrupt input initiates an interrupt sequence. A high to low

### transition initiates an interrupt sequence after the current instruction is completed. The Wait for Interrupt

### instruction may be executed to ensure that the interrupt will be recognized immediately. The non-maskable

### Interrupt vector address is 00FFFA, B (Emulation mode) or 00FFEA, B (Native mode). Since NMIB is an

### edge sensitive input, an interrupt will occur if there is a negative transition while servicing a previous

### interrupt. No interrupt will occur if NMIB remains low after the negative transition was processed. The

### NMIB signal going low causes 4 bytes of information to be pushed onto the stack before jumping to the

### interrupt handler. The first byte on the stack is the PBR followed by the PCH, PCL and P, these register

### values are used by the RTI instruction to return the processor to its original state prior to the NMI interrupt.

### 2.22 Phase 2 In (PHI2)

### Phase 2 In is the system clock input to the microprocessor. PHI2 can be held in either state to preserve the

### contents of internal registers and reduce power as a Standby mode.

### 2.23 Read/Write (RWB)

### The Read/Write output signal is used to control whether the microprocessor is "Reading" or "Writing" to

### memory. When the RWB is in the high state, the microprocessor is reading data from memory or I/O.

### When RBW is low the Data Bus contains valid data from the microprocessor which is to written to the

### addressed memory location. The RWB signal is set to the high impedance state when Bus Enable is low.

### 2.24 Ready (RDY)...............................................................................................................................

### The Ready is a bi-directional signal. When it is an output it indicates that a Wait for Interrupt instruction has

### been executed halting operation of the microprocessor. A low input logic level will halt the microprocessor

### in its current state. Returning RDY to the active high state releases the microprocessor to continue

### processing following the next PHI2 negative transition. The RDY signal is internally pulled low following the

### execution of a Wait for Interrupt instruction, and then returned to the high state when a RESB, ABORTB,

### NMIB, or IRQB external interrupt is active. This feature may be used to reduce interrupt latency by

### executing the WAI instruction and waiting for an interrupt to begin processing. If the IRQB Disable flag has

### been set, the next instruction will be executed when the IRQB occurs. The processor will not stop after a

### WAI instruction if RDY has been forced to a high state. The STP instruction has no effect on RDY. The

### RDY pin has an active pull-up and when outputting a low level, the pull-up is turned off to reduce power.

### The RDY pin can be wired ORed.


### 2.25 Reset (RESB)

### The Reset active low input is used to initialize the microprocessor and start program execution. The Reset

### input buffer has hysteresis such that a simple R-C timing circuit may be used with the internal pull-up

### device. The RESB signal must be held low for at least two clock cycles after VDD reaches operating

### voltage. Ready (RDY) has no effect while RESB is being held low. The stack pointer must be initialized by

### the user's software. During the Reset conditioning period the following processor initialization takes place:

### D= 0000 SH= 01 , SL=

### Registers

### DBR= 00 XH= 00 , XL=

### PBR= 00 YH= 00 , YL=

### A=

### E= 1 VDA= 0

### Signals

### MX= 1 VPB= 1

### RWB= 1 VPA= 0

### 1 1 0 1 1

### N V M X D I Z C/E

### Shaded Area = Not Initialized

### N V M X D I Z C/E

### P Register

### When Reset is brought high, an interrupt sequence is initiated

### • STP and WAI instructions are cleared

### • RWB remains in the high state during the stack address cycles.

### • The Reset vector address is 00FFFC,D.(see Table 6-1 for Vectors)

### • PC is loaded with the contents of 00FFFC,D

### 2.26 Valid Data Address (VDA) and Valid Program Address (VPA)

### The Valid Data Address and Valid Program Address output signals indicate valid memory addresses when

### high and are used for memory or I/O address qualification.

```
VDA VPA
```
```
0 0
```
```
0 1
```
```
1 0
```
```
1 1
```
```
Internal Operation Address and Data Bus available. The Address Bus may be invalid.
```
```
Valid program address-may be used for program cache control.
```
```
Valid data address-may be used for data cache control.
```
```
Opcode fetch-may be used for program cache control and single step control.
```
### 2.27 VDD and VSS

### VDD is the positive supply voltage and VSS is system logic ground.

### 2.28 Vector Pull (VPB)

### The Vector Pull active low output indicates that a vector location is being addressed during an interrupt

### sequence. VPB is low during the last two interrupt sequence cycles, during which time the processor loads

### the PC with the interrupt handler vector location. The VPB signal may be used to select and prioritize

### interrupts from several sources by modifying the vector addresses.


## 3 ADDRESSING MODES

### The W65C816S is capable of directly addressing 16 MBytes of memory. This address space has special

### significance within certain addressing modes, as follows:

### 3.1 Reset and Interrupt Vectors

### The Reset and Interrupt Vectors use the majority of the fixed addresses between 00FFE0 and 00FFFF.

### 3.2 Stack

### The Stack may be use memory from 000000 to 00FFFF. The effective address of Stack and Stack Relative

### addressing modes will be always be within this range.

### 3.3 Direct

### The Direct addressing modes are usually used to store memory registers and pointers. The effective

### address generated by Direct, Direct,X and Direct,Y addressing modes is always in Bank 0 (000000-

### 00FFFF).

### 3.4 Program Address Space

### The Program Bank register is not affected by the Relative, Relative Long, Absolute, Absolute Indirect, and

### Absolute Indexed Indirect addressing modes or by incrementing the Program Counter from FFFF. The only

### instructions that affect the Program Bank register are: RTI, RTL, JML, JSL, and JMP Absolute Long.

### Program code may exceed 64K bytes although code segments may not span bank boundaries.

### 3.5 Data Address Space

### The Data Address space is contiguous throughout the 16 MByte address space. Words, arrays, records, or

### any data structures may span 64 KByte bank boundaries with no compromise in code efficiency. The

### following addressing modes generate 24-bit effective addresses:

### ▪ Absolute a

### ▪ Absolute a,x

### ▪ Absolute a,y

### ▪ Absolute Long al

### ▪ Absolute Long Indexed al,x

### ▪ Direct Indexed Indirect (d,x)

### ▪ Direct Indirect (d)

### ▪ Direct Indirect Indexed (d),y

### ▪ Direct Indirect Long [d]

### ▪ Direct Indirect Long Indexed [d],y

### ▪ Stack Relative Indirect Indexed (d,x),y

### The following addressing mode descriptions provide additional detail as to how effective addresses are

### calculated. Twenty-four addressing modes are available for the W65C816S.


#### 3.5.1 Absolute-a

### With Absolute addressing the second and third bytes of the instruction form the low order 16 bits of the

### effective address. The Data Bank Register contains the high order 8 bits of the operand address.

### Opcode

### DBR

### addrl

### addrh

### addrh

### addrl

### Instruction

### Operand

#### 3.5.2 Absolute Indexed Indirect-(a,x)

### With Absolute Indexed Indirect ((a,x)) addressing the second and third bytes of the instruction are

### added to the X Index Register to form a 16-bit pointer in Bank 0. The contents of this pointer are loaded

### in the Program Counter for the JMP instruction. The Program Bank Register is not changed.

### Instruction: Opcode addrl addrh

### addrh addrl

### X Reg

### PBR address

### then:

### PC = (address)

#### 3.5.3 Absolute Indexed with X-a,x

### With Absolute Indexed with X (a,x) addressing the second and third bytes of the instruction are added

### to the X Index Register to form the low order 16 bits of the effective address. The Data Bank Register

### contains the high order 8 bits of the effective address.

### Instruction: Opcode addrl addrh

### DBR addrh addrl

### + X Reg

### Operand

### Address:

### effective address

#### 3.5.4 Absolute Indexed with Y-a,y

### With Absolute Indexed with Y (a,y) addressing the second and third bytes of the instruction are added

### to the Y Index Register to form the low order 16 bits of the effective address. The Data Bank Register

### contains the high order 8 bits of the effective address.

### Instruction: Opcode addrl addrh

### DBR addrh addrl

### + Y Reg

### Operand

### Address:

### effective address


#### 3.5.5 Absolute Indirect-(a)

### With Absolute Indirect addressing the second and third bytes of the instruction form an address to a

### pointer in Bank 0. The Program Counter is loaded with the first and second bytes at this pointer. With

### the Jump Long (JML) instruction, the Program Bank Register is loaded with the third byte of the pointer.

Instruction: (^) Opcode addrl addrh
Indirect (^00) addrh addrl

#### 3.5.6 Absolute Long Indexed With X-al,x

### With Absolute Long Indexed with X (al,x) addressing the second, third and fourth bytes of the instruction

### form a 24-bit base address. The effective address is the sum of this 24-bit address and the X Index

### Register.

Instruction: (^) Opcode addrl addrh baddr
(^) baddr addrh addrl
(^) + X Reg

### Operand

### Address:

### effective address

#### 3.5.7 Absolute Long-al

### With Absolute Long (al) addressing the second, third and fourth byte of the instruction form the 24-bit

### effective address.

### Instruction: Opcode addrl addrh baddr

### Operand

### Address:

### baddr addrh addrl

#### 3.5.8 Accumulator-A

### With Accumulator (A) addressing the operand is the Accumulator.


#### 3.5.9 Block Move-xyc

### Block Move (xyc) addressing is used by the Block Move instructions. The second byte of the instruction

### contains the high-order 8 bits of the destination address and the Y Index Register contains the low-

### order 16 bits of the destination address. The third byte of the instruction contains the high-order 8 bits

### of the source address and the X Index Register contains the low-order bits of the source address. The

### C Accumulator contains one less than the number of bytes to move. The second byte of the block

### move instructions is also loaded into the Data Bank Register.

### Instruction: Opcode dstbnk srcbnk

### Source Address: srcbnk X Reg

### Dest. Address: dstbnk Y Reg

### Increment X and Y (MVN) or decrement X and Y (MVP) and decrement C (if greater than zero), then

### PC=PC+3.

#### 3.5.10 Direct Indexed Indirect-(d,x)

### Direct Indexed Indirect ((d,x)) addressing is often referred to as Indirect X addressing. The second byte

### of the instruction is added to the sum of the Direct Register and the X Index Register. The result points

### to the X low-order 16 bits of the effective address. The Data Bank Register contains the high-order 8

### bits of the effective address.

### Instruction: Opcode offset

### Direct Register

### + offset

### direct address

### + X Reg

### 00 (address)

### then: + DBR

### Operand Address: effective address


#### 3.5.11 Direct Indexed with X-d,x

### With Direct Indexed with X (d,x) addressing the second byte of the instruction is added to the sum of the

### Direct Register and the X Index Register to form the 16-bit effective address. The operand is always in

### Bank 0.

### Instruction: Opcode offset

### Direct Register

### + offset

### direct address

### + X Reg

### Operand

### Address:

### 00 effective address

#### 3.5.12 Direct Indexed with Y-d,y

### With Direct Indexed with Y (d,y) addressing the second byte of the instruction is added to the sum of the

### Direct Register and the Y Index Register to form the 16-bit effective address. The operand is always in

### Bank 0.

### Instruction: Opcode offset

### Direct Register

### + offset

### direct address

### + Y Reg

### Operand

### Address:

### 00 effective address

#### 3.5.13 Direct Indirect Indexed-(d),y

### Direct Indirect Indexed ((d),y) addressing is often referred to as Indirect Y addressing. The second byte

### of the instruction is added to the Direct Register (D). The 16-bit content of this memory location is then

### combined with the Data Bank register to form a 24-bit base address. The Y Index Register is added to

### the base address to form the effective address.

### Instruction: Opcode offset

### Direct Register

### + offset

### 00 (direct address)

### then: + DBR

### base address

### + Y Reg

### Operand

### Address:

### effective address


#### 3.5.14 Direct Indirect Long Indexed-[d],y

### With Direct Indirect Long Indexed ([d],y) addressing the 24-bit base address is pointed to by the sum

### of the second byte of the instruction and the Direct Register. The effective address is this 24-bit base

### address plus the Y Index Register.

### Instruction: Opcode offset

### Direct Register

### + offset

### 00 direct address

### base address

### then + Y Reg

### Operand

### Address:

### effective address

#### 3.5.15 Direct Indirect Long-[d]

### With Direct Indirect Long ([d]) addressing the second byte of the instruction is added to the Direct

### Register to form a pointer to the 24-bit effective address.

### Instruction: Opcode offset

### Direct Register

### then: + offset

### 00 (direct address)

### Operand

### Address:

### direct address

#### 3.5.16 Direct Indirect-(d)

### With Direct Indirect ((d)) addressing the second byte of the instruction is added to the Direct Register to

### form a pointer to the low-order 16 bits of the effective address. The Data Bank Register contains the

### high-order 8 bits of the effective address.

### Instruction: Opcode offset

### Direct Register

### + offset

### 00 (direct address)

### then: + DBR

### Operand

### Address:

### effective address


#### 3.5.17 Direct-d

### With Direct (d) addressing the second byte of the instruction is added to the Direct Register (D) to

### form the effective address. An additional cycle is required when the Direct Register is not page

### aligned (DL not equal 0). The Bank register is always 0.

### Instruction: Opcode offset

### Direct Register

### + offset

### Operand

### Address:

### 00 effective address

#### 3.5.18 Immediate-#

### With Immediate (#) addressing the operand is the second byte (second and third bytes when in the

### 16 - bit mode) of the instruction.

#### 3.5.19 Implied-i

### Implied (i) addressing uses a single byte instruction. The operand is implicitly defined by the instruction.

#### 3.5.20 Program Counter Relative Long-rl

### The Program Counter Relative Long (rl) addressing mode is used with only with the unconditional

### Branch Long instruction (BRL) and the Push Effective Relative instruction (PER). The second and

### third bytes of the instruction are added to the Program Counter, which has been updated to point to

### the opcode of the next instruction. With the branch instruction, the Program Counter is loaded with

### the result. With the Push Effective Relative instruction, the result is stored on the stack. The offset is

### a signed 16-bit quantity in the range from -32768 to 32767. The Program Bank Register is not

### affected.

#### 3.5.21 Program Counter Relative-r

### The Program Counter Relative (r) addressing is referred to as Relative Addressing and is used only

### with the Branch instructions. If the condition being tested is met, the second byte of the instruction is

### added to the Program Counter, which has been updated to point to the opcode of the next instruction.

### The offset is a signed 8-bit quantity in the range from -128 to 127. The Program Bank Register is not

### affected.

#### 3.5.22 Stack-s

### Stack (s) addressing refers to all instructions that push or pull data from the stack, such as Push, Pull,

### Jump to Subroutine, Return from Subroutine, Interrupts, and Return from Interrupt. The bank address

### is always 0. Interrupt Vectors are always fetched from Bank 0.


#### 3.5.23 Stack Relative-d,s

### With Stack Relative (d,s) addressing the low-order 16 bits of the effective address is formed from the

### sum of the second byte of the instruction and the stack pointer. The high-order 8 bits of the effective

### address are always zero. The relative offset is an unsigned 8-bit quantity in the range of 0 to 255.

### Instruction: Opcode offset

### Stack Pointer

### then: + offset

### Operand Address: 00 effective address

#### 3.5.24 Stack Relative Indirect Indexed-(d,s),y....................................................................................

### With Stack Relative Indirect Indexed ((d,s),y) addressing the second byte of the instruction is added to

### the Stack Pointer to form a pointer to the low-order 16-bit base address in Bank 0. The Data Bank

### Register contains the high-order 8 bits of the base address. The effective address is the sum of the 24-

### bit base address and the Y Index Register.

### Instruction: Opcode offset

### Stack Pointer

### offset

### 00 S + offset

### then + DBR

### base address

### + Y Reg

### Operand Address: effective address


## Table 3-1 Addressing Mode Summary

### Address Mode Instruction Times in Memory

### Cycle

### Memory Utilization in Number

### of Program Sequence Bytes

### Original 8-bit

### NMOS

### 6502

### New

### W65C816S

### Original 8-bit

### NMOS

### 6502

### New

### W65C816S

### Absolute 4 (5) 4 (3,5) 3 3

### Absolute Indexed Indirect (Jump) - 6 - 3

### Absolute Indirect (Jump) 5 5 3 3

### Absolute Long - 5 (3) - 4

### Absolute Long, X - 5 (3) - 4

### Absolute, X 4 (1,5) 4 (1,3,5) 3 3

### Absolute, Y 4 (1) 4 (1,3) 3 3

### Accumulator 2 2 1 1

### Block Move (xyc) - 7 - 3

### Direct 3 (5) 3 (3,4,5) 2 2

### Direct Indexed Indirect (d,x) 6 6 (3,4) 2 2

### Direct Indirect - 5 (3,4) - 2

### Direct Indirect Indexed (d),y 5 (1) 5 (1,3,4) 2 2

### Direct Indirect Indexed Long [d],y - 6 (3,4) - 2

### Direct Indirect Long - 6 (3,4) - 2

### Direct, X 4 (5) 4 (3,4,5) 2 2

### Direct, Y 4 4 (3,4) 2 2

### Immediate 2 2 (3) 2 2 (3)

### Implied 2 2 1 1

### Relative 2 (1,2) 2 (2) 2 2

### Relative Long - 3 (2) - 3

### Stack 3 - 7 3 - 8 1 1

### Stack Relative - 4 (3) - 2

### Stack Relative Indirect Indexed - 7 (3) - 2

### Notes (these are indicated in parentheses):

### 1. Page boundary, add 1 cycle if page boundary is crossed when forming address. STA

### abs,x takes 5 cycles when M=1.

### 2. Branch taken, add 1 cycle if branch is taken.

### 3. M = 0 or X = 0, 16 bit operation, add 1 cycle, add 1 byte for immediate.

### 4. Direct register low (DL) not equal zero, add 1 cycle.

### 5. Read-Modify-Write, add 2 cycles for M = 1, add 3 cycles for M = 0.


## 4 TIMING, AC AND DC CHARACTERISTICS

### 4.1 Absolute Maximum Ratings

## Table 4-1 Absolute Maximum Ratings

### Rating Symbol Value

### Supply Voltage VDD - 0.3 to +7.0V

### Input Voltage VIN - 0.3 to VDD +0.3V

Storage Temperature TS (^) - 55 C to +150C
This device contains input protection against damage due to high static voltages or electric fields;
however, precautions should be taken to avoid application of voltages higher than the maximum
rating.
Note: Exceeding these ratings may result in permanent damage. Functional operation under the
conditions is not implied.

### 4.2 DC Characteristics TA = - 40 ° C to +85 ° C

### Table 4 - 2 DC Characteristics

5.0 +/- 5% 3.3 +/- 10% 3.0 +/- 5% 2.5 +/- 5% 1.8 +/- 5% Units
Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max
VDD 4.75 5.25 3.0 3.6 2.85 3.15 2.375 2.625 1.71 1.89 V

```
Vih
Input High Voltage
ABORTB, BE, Data, IRQB, RDY,
NMIB, PHI2, RESB
```
```
VDDx0.
8
VDD+0.3
VDDx0.8
VDD+0.3
VDDx0.8
VDD+0.3
VDDx0.8
VDD+0.3
VDDx0.8
VDD+0.3
V
```
```
Vil
```
```
Input Low Voltage
ABORTB, BE, Data, IRQB, RDY,
NMIB, PHI2, RESB
```
```
VSS-
0.3
```
```
VDDx0.
2
VSS-0.3
VDDx0.2
VSS-0.3
VDDx0.2
VSS-0.3
VDDx0.
2
VSS-0.3
VDDx0.
2
V
```
```
Ipup RDY Input Pullup(VIN=VDDx0.8) - Current 5 20 5 20 5 20 2 10 2 10 A
Iin
Input Leakage Current (Vin=0.4 to 2.4)
PHI2, Address, Data, RWB, (Off state,
BE=0), All other inputs
```
- 0.2 0.2 - 0.2 0.2 - 0.2 0.2 - 0.2 0.2 - 0.2 0.2 (^) A
Ioh
Output High Voltage (Vol=VDD-0.4V)
Address, Data, E, MLB, MX,
RWB, VDA, VPA, VPB
700 - 300 - 300 - 200 - 100 - A
Iol
Output Low Voltage (Vol=VSS+0.4V)
Address, Data, E, MLB, MX, RWB,
VDA, VPA, VPB
3.2 20 1.6 - 1.6 - 1.0 - .5 - mA
Idd Supply Current (no load)Supply Current (core) - -^ 2.01.0^ - 1.50.6^ - 1.50.5^ - 1.00.4^ - 0.750.30^ MHzmA/^
Isby
Standby Current (No Load, Data Bus =
VSS or VDD)
ABORTB, BE, IRQB, NMIB, RESB,
PHI2=VDD
- 1 - 1 - 1 - (^1) ^ A
Cin
Cts
Capacitance (Vin=0V, TA=25C, f=1MHz)
ABORTB, BE, IRQB, NMIB, PHI2,
RBW, RESB, RDY,
Address, Data, R/W- (Off state)
* Not inspected during production
test; verified on a sample basis.

- 5 - 5 - 5 - 5 - 5 pFpF^


```
0. 0
```
```
0. 2
```
```
0. 4
```
```
0. 6
```
```
0. 8
```
```
1. 0
```
```
1. 2
```
```
1. 4
```
```
1. 6
```
```
1. 8
```
```
2. 0
```
```
2. 2
```
```
2. 4
```
```
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
```
##### +

##### +

##### +

##### +

ID

D
(m

A
)

```
VDD (VOLTS)
```
```
1 MHz Operation@ 85 °C
Typical 0. 6 u processed device
(With tester loading)
+ (Core power only)
```
### Figure 4 - 1 IDD vs. VDD

```
0. 0
```
```
0. 5
```
```
1. 0
```
```
1. 5
```
```
2. 0
```
```
2. 5
```
```
3. 0
```
```
3. 5
```
```
4. 0
```
```
4. 5
```
```
5. 0
```
```
5. 5
```
```
6. 0
```
```
0 4 8
```
### +

### +

### +

### +

##### V

##### D

##### D

##### (

##### V

##### O

##### LT

##### S

##### )

```
F Max (MHz)
```
```
Typical 0. 6 μ processed device @ 85 °C
```
```
2 6 10 12 14 16 18 20
```
### Figure 4 - 2 F Max vs. VDD


### 27

## Table 4-2 W65C816S AC Characteristics

Symbol Parameter 5.0 +/- 5% 3.3 +/- 10% 3.0 +/- 5% 2.5 +/- 5% 1.8 +/- 5% Units
14MHz 8MHz 8MHz 4MHz 2MHz

Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max

VDD (^) 4.75 5.25 3.0 3.6 2.85 3.15 2.375 2.675 1.71 1.89 V
tCYC Cycle Time (^70) DC 125 DC 125 DC 250 DC 500 DC nS
tPWL Clock Pulse Width Low (^35) - 63 - 63 - 125 - 250 - nS
tPWH Clock Pulse Width High (^35) - 62 - 62 - 125 - 250 - nS
tF,tR Fall Time, Rise Time (^) - 5 - 5 - 5 - 5 - 5 nS
tAH A0-A15 Hold Time (^10) - 10 - 10 - 20 - 40 - nS
tADS A0-A15 Setup Time (^) - 30 - 40 - 40 - 75 - 150 nS
tBH BA0-BA7 Hold Time (^10) - 10 - 10 - 20 - 40 - nS
tBAS BA0-BA7 Setup Time (^) - 33 - 40 - 40 - 75 - 150 nS
tACC Access Time (^30) - 70 - 70 - 130 - 365 - nS
tDHR Read Data Hold Time (^10) - 10 - 10 - 20 - 40 - nS
tDSR Read Data Setup Time (^10) - 15 - 20 - 30 - 40 - nS
tMDS Write Data Delay Time (^) - 30 - 40 - 40 - 70 - 140 nS
tDHW Write Data Hold Time (^10) - 10 - 10 - 20 - 40 - nS
tPCS
Processor Control Setup

### Time 10 -^15 -^15 -^30 -^60 -^ nS^

tPCH
Processor Control Hold

### Time 10 -^10 -^10 -^20 -^40 -^ nS^

tEH E, MX Output Hold Time (^) - 5 - 5 - 5 - 5 - 5 nS
tES E, MX Output Setup Time (^10) - 15 - 15 - 30 - 60 - nS
CEXT Capacitive Load (1) (^) - 35 - 35 - 35 - 35 - 35 Pf
tBVD be TO Valid Data (2) (^) - 25 - 30 - 30 - 60 - 120 nS

### 1. Test or loading on all outputs.

### 2. BE to High Impedance State is not testable but should be the same amount of time as BE to Valid

### Data.


```
PHI 2
tPWL
```
```
tCYC
```
```
tMDS
```
```
tAH tR
RWB, MLB, VPB
A 0 - A 15 , VDA VPA
```
```
READ DATA,
BA 0 - BA 7
```
```
WRITE DATA,
BA 0 - BA 7
```
```
IRQB, NMIB,
RESB, RDY
```
```
tF tPWH
```
```
tF
```
```
ABORTB
```
```
M/X
```
```
E
```
```
tADS
```
```
tBAS
```
```
BA 0 - BA 7
```
```
BA 0 - BA 7 WRITE DATA
```
```
READ DATA
```
```
tACC tDSR
```
```
tES
```
```
tDHR
```
```
tDHW tPCS
```
```
tPCH
```
```
X X M
```
```
tPCS
```
```
tES tEH
```
```
M
tEH
```
## Figure 4-1 General Timing Diagram

### 1. Timing measurement points are 50% VDD.


## 5 OPERATION TABLES...........................................................................................

## Table 5-1 W65C816S Instruction Set-Alphabetical Sequence

1. ADC Add Memory to Accumulator with Carry 47. PHB Push Data Bank Register on Stack
2. AND "AND" Memory with Accumulator 48. PHD Push Direct Register on Stack
3. ASL Shift One Bit Left, Memory or Accumulator 49. PHK Push Program Bank Register on Stack
4. BCC Branch on Carry Clear (C=0) 50. PHP Push Processor Status on Stack
5. BCS Branch on Carry Set (C=1) 51. PHX Push Index X on Stack
6. BEQ Branch if Equal (Z=1) 52. PHY Push Index Y on Stack
7. BIT Bit Test 53. PLA Pull Accumulator from Stack
8. BMI Branch if Result Minus (N=1) 54. PLB Pull Data Bank Register from Stack
9. BNE Branch if Not Equal (Z=0) 55. PLD Pull Direct Register from Stack
10. BPL Branch if Result Plus (N=0) 56. PLP Pull Processor Status from Stack
11. BRA Branch Always 57. PLX Pull Index X from Stack
12. BRK Force Break 58. PLY Pull Index Y from Stack
13. BRL Branch Always Long 59. REP Reset Status Bits
14. BVC Branch on Overflow Clear (V=0) 60. ROL Rotate One Bit Left (Memory or Accumulator)
15. BVS Branch on Overflow Set (V=1) 61. ROR Rotate One Bit Right
16. CLC Clear Carry Flag 62. RTI Return from Interrupt
17. CLD Clear Decimal Mode 63. RTL Return from Subroutine Long
18. CLI Clear Interrupt Disable Bit 64. RTS Return from Subroutine
19. CLV Clear Overflow Flag 65. SBC Subtract Memory from Accumulator
20. CMP Compare Memory and Accumulator 66. SEP Set Processor Status Bit
21. COP Coprocessor 67. SEC Set Carry Flag
22. CPX Compare Memory and Index X 68. SED Set Decimal Mode
23. CPY Compare Memory and Index Y 69. SEI Set Interrupt Disable Status
24. DEC Decrement Memory or Accumulator by One 70. STA Store Accumulator in Memory
25. DEX Decrement Index X by One 71. STP Stop the Clock
26. DEY Decrement Index Y by One 72. STX Store Index X in Memory
27. EOR "Exclusive OR" Memory with Accumulator 73. STY Store Index Y in Memory
28. INC Increment Memory or Accumulator by One 74. STZ Store Zero in Memory
29. INX Increment Index X by One 75. TAX Transfer Accumulator in Index X
30. INY Increment Index Y by One 76. TAY Transfer Accumulator to Index Y
31. JML Jump Long 77. TCD Transfer C Accumulator to Direct Register
32. JMP Jump to New Location 78. TCS Transfer C Accumulator to Stack Pointer
33. JSL Jump Subroutine Long 79. TDC Transfer Direct Register to C Accumulator
34. JSR Jump to News Location Saving Return 80. TRB Test and Reset Bit
35. LDA Load Accumulator with Memory 81. TSB Test and Set Bit
36. LDX Load Index X with Memory 82. TSC Transfer Stack Pointer to C Accumulator
37. LDY Load Index Y with Memory 83. TSX Transfer Stack Pointer Register to Index X
38. LSR Shift One Bit Right (Memory or Accumulator) 84. TXA Transfer Index X to Accumulator
39. MVN Block Move Negative 85. TXS Transfer Index X to Stack Pointer Register
40. MVP Block Move Positive 86. TXY Transfer Index X to Index Y
41. NOP No Operation 87. TYA Transfer Index Y to Accumulator
42. ORA "OR" Memory with Accumulator 88. TYX Transfer Index Y to Index X
43. PEA Push Absolute Address 89. WAI Wait for Interrupt
44. PEI Push Indirect Address 90. WDM Reserved for future use
45. PER Push Program Counter Relative Address 91. XBA Exchange B and A Accumulator
46. PHA Push Accumulator on Stack 92. XCE Exchange Carry and Emulation Bits


## Table 5-2 Emulation Mode Vector Locations (8-bit Mode)

```
Address Label Function
00FFFE,F IRQB/BRK Hardware/Software
00FFFC,D RESETB Hardware
00FFFA,B NMIB Hardware
00FFF8,9 ABORTB Hardware
00FFF6,7 (Reserved) Hardware
00FFF4,5 COP Software
00FFF2,3 (Reserved)
00FFF0,1 (Reserved)
```
## Table 5-3 Native Mode Vector Locations (16-bit Mode)

```
Address Label Function
00FFEE,F IRQB Hardware
00FFEC,D (Reserved)
00FFEA,B NMIB Hardware
00FFE8,9 ABORTB
00FFE6,7 BRK Software
00FFE4,5 COP Software
00FFE2,3 (Reserved)
00FFE0,1 (Reserved)
```
### The VP output is low during the two cycles used for vector location access. When an interrupt is executed,

### D=0 and I=1 in Status Register P.


## Table 5-4 Opcode Matrix

```
M M
S S
D D
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D E F
BRK ORA COP ORA TSB ORA ASL ORA PHP ORA ASL PHD TSB ORA ASL ORA
s (d,x) s d,s d d d [d] s # A s a a a al
7,2 6,2 7,2 4,2 5,2 3,2 5,2 6,2 3,1 2,2 2,1 4,1 6,3 4,3 6,3 5,4
BPL ORA ORA ORA TRB ORA ASL ORA CLC ORA INC TCS TRB ORA ASL ORA
r (d),y (d) (d,s),y d d,x d,x [d],y i a,y A i a a,x a,x al,x
2,2 5,2 5,2 7,2 5,2 4,2 6,2 6,2 2,1 4,3 2,1 2,1 6,3 4,3 7,3 5,4
JSR AND JSL AND BIT AND ROL AND PLP AND ROL PLD BIT AND ROL AND
a (d,x) al d,s d d d [d] s # A s a a a al
6,3 6,2 8,4 4,2 3,2 3,2 5,2 6,2 4,1 2,2 2,1 5,1 4,3 4,3 6,3 5,4
BMI AND AND AND BIT AND ROL AND SEC AND DEC TSC BIT AND ROL AND
R (d),y (d) (d,s),y d,x d,x d,x [d],y i a,y A i a,x a,x a,x al,x
2,2 5,2 5,2 7,2 4,2 4,2 6,2 6,2 2,1 4,3 2,1 2,1 4,3 4,3 7,3 5,4
RTI EOR WDM EOR MVP EOR LSR EOR PHA EOR LSR PHK JMP EOR LSR EOR
s (d,x) i d,s xyc d d [d] s # A s a a a Al
7,1 6,2 2,2 4,2 7,3 3,2 5,2 6.2 3,1 2,2 2,1 3,1 3,3 4,3 6,3 5,4
BVC EOR EOR EOR MVN EOR LSR EOR CLI EOR PHY TCD JMP EOR LSR EOR
r (d),y (d) (d,s),y xyc d,x d,x [d].y i a,y s i al a,x a,x al,x
2,2 5,2 5,2 7,2 7,3 4,2 6,2 6,2 2,1 4,3 3,1 2,1 4,4 4,3 7,3 5,4
RTS ADC PER ADC STZ ADC ROR ADC PLA ADC ROR RTL JMP ADC ROR ADC
s (d,x) s d,s d d d [d] s # A s (a) a a al
6,1 6,2 6,3 4,2 3,2 3,2 5,2 6,2 4,1 2,2 2,1 6,1 5,3 4,3 6,3 5,4
BVS ADC ADC ADC STZ ADC ROR ADC SEI ADC PLY TDC JMP ADC ROR ADC
r (d),y (d) (d,s),y d,x d,x d,x [d],y i a,y s i (a,x) a,x a,x al,x
2,2 5,2 5,2 7,2 4,2 4,2 6,2 6,2 2,1 4,3 4,1 2,1 6,3 4,3 7,3 5,4
BRA STA BRL STA STY STA STX STA DEY BIT TXA PHB STY STA STX STA
r (d,x) rl d,s d d d [d] i # i s a a a al
2,2 6,2 4,3 4,2 3,2 3,2 3,2 2,2 2,1 2,2 2,1 3,1 4,3 4,3 4,3 5,4
BCC STA STA STA STY STA STX STA TYA STA TXS TXY STZ STA STZ STA
r (d),y (d) (d,s),y d,x d,x d,y [d],y i a,y i i a a,x a,x al,x
2,2 6,2 5,2 7,2 4,2 4,2 4,2 6,2 2,1 5,3 2,1 2,1 4,3 5,3 5,3 5,4
LDY LDA LDX LDA LDY LDA LDX LDA TAY LDA TAX PLB LDY LDA LDX LDA
# (d,x) # d,s d d d [d] i # i s a a a al
2,2 6,2 2,2 4,2 3,2 3,2 3,2 6,2 2,1 2,2 2,1 4,1 4,3 4.3 4,3 5,4
BCS LDA LDA LDA LDY LDA LDX LDA CLV LDA TSX TYX LDY LDA LDX LDA
r (d),y (d) (d,s),y d,x d,x d,y [d],y i a,y i i a,x a,x a,y al,x
2.2 5,2 5,2 7,2 4,2 4,2 4,2 6,2 2,1 4,3 2,1 2,1 4,3 4,3 4,3 5,4
CPY CMP REP CMP CPY CMP DEC CMP INY CMP DEX WAI CPY CMP CMP
# (d,x) # d,s d d d [d] i # i I a a al
2,2 6,2 3,2 4,2 3,2 3,2 5,2 6,2 2,1 2,2 2,1 3,1 4,3 4,3 6,3 5,4
BNE CMP CMP CMP PEI CMP DEC CMP CLD CMP PHX STP JML CMP DEC CMP
r (d),y (d) (d,s),y s d,x d,x [d],y i a,y s i (a) a,x a,x al,x
2,2 5,2 5,2 7,2 6,2 4,2 6,2 6,2 2,1 4,3 3,1 3,1 6,3 4,3 7,3 5,4
CPX SBC SEP SBC CPX SBC INC SBC INX SBC NOP XBA CPX SBC INC SBC
# (d,x) # d,s d d d [d] i # i i a a a al
2,2 6,2 3,2 4,2 3,2 3,2 5,2 6,2 2,1 2,2 2,1 3,1 4,3 4,3 6,3 5,4
BEQ SBC SBC PEA SBC INC SBC SED SBC PLX XCE JSR SBC INC SBC
r (d) (d,s),y s d,x d,x [d],y i a,y s i (a,x) a,x a,x al,x
2,2 5,2 5,2 7,2 5,3 4,2 6,2 6,2 2,1 4,3 4,1 2,1 8,3 4,3 7.3 5,4
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D E F
```
New OPCODE on the W65C816S
OPCODE with new features on the W65C816S
Cycle Count Assumes:
-- branches are not taken
-- no page boundary crossings (if in emulation mode)
-- the M and X flags are 1 (8-bit Accumulator and Index Registers)
-- BRK and COP assume emulation mode
-- RTI assumes native mode

```
SBC (d),y
F
```
```
E E
```
```
F
```
```
DEC a
```
```
B
```
```
D
```
```
C C
```
```
D
```
```
B
```
```
A
```
```
9 9
```
```
A
```
```
6
```
```
7
```
```
8
```
```
6
```
```
7
```
```
8
```
```
3
```
```
4
```
```
5
```
```
3
```
```
4
```
```
5
```
```
2 2
```
```
LSD
```
```
0 0
```
```
1 1
```

## Table 5-5 Operation, Operation Codes, and Status Register

### Mnemonic

### Operation Opcodes Status Register

```
7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
Addressing Mode a^ A
a,x
a,y
al
al,x
(a)
(a,x)
d^ d,s
d,x
d,y
(d)
[d]
(d,s),
y^ (d,x)
(d),y
[d],y
i^ r^ rl^ s^ xyc
#^ N V M X D I Z C
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 N V 1 B D I Z C
```
ADC A+M+C→A 6D 7D 79 6F 7F 65 63 75 72 67 73 61 71 77 69 N V.... Z C

AND A^M→A 2D^ 3E^39 2F^ 3F^25 23 35  32 27 33 21 31 37      29 N^.^.^.^.^.^ Z^.^

ASL C15/7 6 ...^10 ^0 0E^ 0A^ 1E^06  16 N^.^.^.^.^.^ Z^ C^

BCC Branch if C = 0 90........

BCS Branch if C = 1 B0........

BEQ Branch if Z = 1 F0........

BIT A ^ M (Note 1) 2C 3C 24 34 89 M M^.... Z.

BMI Branch if N = 0 30........

BNE Branch if Z = 0 D0^.^.^.^.^.^.^.^.^

BPL Branch if N = 0 10........

BRA Branch Always 80........

BRK Break (Note 2) 00... • 0 1..

BRL* Branch Long Always 82.^.^.^.^.^.^.^.^

BVC Branch if V = 0 50........

BVS Branch if V = 1 70........

CLC (^) C → 0 18....... 0
CLD (^0) → D D8.... 0...
CLI (^0) → 1 58..... 0..
CLV 0 → V B8. 0......
CMP A-M CD DD D9 CF DF C5 C3 D5 D2 C7 D3 C1 D1 D7 C9 N..... Z C
COP* Co-Processor 02.... 0 1..
CPX X-M EC E4 E0 N..... Z C
CPY Y-M CC C4 C0 N..... Z C
DEC Decrement CE 3A DE C6 D6 N..... Z.
DEX X- 1 → A CA^ N..... Z.
DEY Y- 1 → Y 88 N..... Z.
EOR A xv M → A 4D^ 5D^59 4F^ 5F^ 5D^45 43 55  52 47 53 41 51 57      49 N..... Z.
INC Increments EE 1A FE E6 F6 N..... Z.
INX X+1 → X E8 N..... Z.
INY Y+1 → Y C8 N..... Z.
JML* Jump Longlocation to new DC........
JMP Jump to new location 4C^ 5C^ 6C^ 7C^........
JSL* Jsubroutineump^ long^ to 22........
JSR Jump to Subroutine 20 FC........
LDA M → A AD BD B9 AF BF A5 A3 B5 B2 A7 B3 A1 B1 B7 A9 N..... Z.


### Table 5-5 continued

```
Mnemonic
```
(^) Operation OpCodes Status Register
Addressing Mode
7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
a^ A^ a,x
a,y
al
al,x
(a)
(a,x)
d^ d,s
d,x
d,y
(d)
[d]
(d,s),
y^ (d,x)
(d),y
[d],y
i^ r^ rl^ s^ xyc
#^ N V M X D I Z C
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 N V 1 B D I Z C
LDX M → X AE^ BE^ A6^ B6^ A2^ N^.^.^.^.^.^ Z^.^
LDY M → Y AC BC A4 B4 A0 N..... Z.
LSR 0 →^ 15/7 6 ... 1 0 →^ C^ 4E^ 4A^ 5E^46  56              0.^.^.^.^.^ Z^ C^
MVN* M→M NEGATIVE 54........
MVP* M→M POSITIVE 44........
NOP No Operation EA^.^.^.^.^.^.^.^.
ORA A V M → A 0D 1D 19 0F 1F 05 03 15 12 07 13 01 11 17 09 N..... Z.
PEA* Mpc+1, Mpc+2 → MsS-2 → S - 1, Ms^ F4........
PEI* M(d), M(d+1) → MsS-2 → S - 1, Ms^ D4........
PER* Mpc+rl, Mpc+rl+1 → MsMs S-2 → S - 1, 62........
PHA A → Ms, S- 1 → S 48........
PHB* DBR → Ms, S-1 → S 8B........
PHD* D → Ms, Ms-1, S-2 → S 0B........
PHK* PBR → Ms, S-1 → S 4B........
PHP (^) P → Ms, S- 1 → S 08........
PHX X → Ms, S- 1 → S DA........
PHY Y → Ms, S- 1 → S 5A........
PLA S + 1 → S, Ms → A 68 N..... Z.
PLB S + 1 → S, Ms → DBR AB N..... Z.
PLD S + 2→ D →^ S, Ms –^ 1, Ms 2B N..... Z.
PLP S + 1 → S, Ms → P 28 N V M X D 1 Z C
PLX S + 1 → S, Ms → X FA N..... Z.
PLY S + 1 → S, Ms → Y 7A N..... Z
REP M^P → P C2 N V M X D 1 Z C
ROL C  C^ 15/7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 2E 2A 3E 26 36 N..... Z C
ROR C → →C 15/7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 6E 6A 7E 66 76 N..... Z C
RTI Return from Interrupt 40 N V M X D 1 Z C
RTL* Return from Sub. Long 6B........
RTS Return from Subroutine 60........
SBC A – M – (C) → A ED FD F9 FF E5 E3 F5 F2 E7 F3 E1 F1 F7 E9 N V.... Z C
SEC 1 → C 38....... 1
SED 1 → D F8.... 1...
SEI (^1) → 1 78..... 1..
SEP* MVP → P E2 N V M X D 1 Z C
STA A → M 8D 9D 8F 9F 85 83 95 92 87 93 81 91 97........
STP (^) STOP (1 → PH12) D8........
STX X → M 8E 86 96........


### Table 5-5 continued

```
Mnemonic
```
(^) Operation OpCodes Status Register
7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
Addressing Mode a^ A
a,x
a,y
al
al,x
(a)
(a,x)
d^ d,s
d,x
d,y
(d)
[d]
(d,s),
y^ (d,x)
(d),y
[d],y
i^ r^ rl^ s^ xyc
#^ N V M X D I Z C
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 N V 1 B D I Z C
STY Y → M 8C^84  94.^.^.^.^.^.^.^.^
STZ 00 → M 9C^ 9E^64  74.^.^.^.^.^.^.^.
TAX A →^ X^ AA^ N^.^.^.^.^.^ Z^.^
TAY A → Y AB N..... Z.
TCD* C → D 5B N..... Z.
TCS* C → S 1B........
TDC* D → C 7B N..... Z.
TRB 1 C^14.^.^.^.^.^.^ Z^.
TSB AVM → M 0C 04...... Z.
TSC* S → C 3B N..... Z.
TSX S → X BA N..... Z.
TXA X → A 8 A N..... Z.
TXS X → S 9A ,..... ,.
TXY* X → Y 9B N..... Z.
TYA Y → A 98 N^.^.^.^.^.^ Z^
TYX* Y → X BB N..... Z.
WAI 0 → RDY CB........
WDM* No Operation 42........
XBA* B → A EB N..... Z.
XCE* M → Y FB....... E

### Notes:

### 1) The following are the definitions of the operational symbols used:

### + ADD, ^ AND, xv Exclusive OR, * Multiply, ~ NOT, v OR, - Subtract

### 2) Bit immediate N and V flags not affected. When M=0, M 15 →N and M 14 →V.

### 3) Break Bit (B) in Status register indicates hardware or software break.

### 4)  = New W65C816 instructions


### Table 5 - 6 Addressing Mode Symbol Table

### Symbol Addressing Mode Symbol Addressing Mode

### # immediate [d] direct indirect long

### A accumulator [d],y direct indirect long indexed

### r program counter relative a absolute

### rl program counter relative long a,x absolute indexed with x

### I implied a,y absolute indexed with y

### s stack al absolute long

### d direct al,x absolute long indexed

### d,x direct indexed with x d,s stack relative

### d,y direct indexed with y (d,s),y stack relative indirect indexed

### (d) direct indirect (a) absolute indirect

### (d,x) direct indexed indirect (a,x) absolute indexed indirect

### (d),y direct indirect indexed xyc block move


### Table 5 - 7 Instruction Operation (continued on following 6 pages)

```
Address Mode Note Cycl
e
```
##### VPB MLB VDA

##### (14)

##### VPA

##### (14)

```
Address Bus
(15)
```
```
Data Bus RWB
```
1a. Absolute a
ADC, AND, BIT, CMP, CPX, CPY, EOR,
LDA, LDX LDY ORA, SBC, STA, STX,
STY, STZ,
18 OpCodes, 3 bytes, 4 & 5 cycles
(1)

##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

##### 4

```
4a
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### DBR,AA

##### DBR,AA+1

```
OpCode
AAL
AAH
Data Low
Data High
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1/0

##### 1/0

1b. Absolute a
JMP (4C)
1 OpCode, 3 bytes, 3 cycles

##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

```
PBR,New PC
```
```
OpCode
New PCL
New PCH
OpCode
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

1c. Absolute a
JSR
1 OpCode, 3 bytes, 6 cycles
(different order from N6502)

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 0 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 0 0 0 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### PBR,PC+2

##### 0,S

##### 0,S- 1

##### PBR,NEWPC

```
OpCode
New PCL
New PCH
IO
PCH
PCL
Next
OpCode
```
##### 1 1 1 1 0 0 1

1d. Absolute (R-M-W) a
ASL, DEC, INC, LSR, ROL, ROR, TRB,
TSB
6 OpCodes, 3 bytes, 6 & 8 cycles
(1)
(3)(17)
(1)

##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

##### 4

```
4a
5
6a
6
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0

##### 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1

##### 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### DBR,AA

##### DBR,AA+1

##### DBR,AA+1

##### DBR,AA+1

##### DBR,AA

```
OpCode
AAL
AAH
Data Low
Data High
IO
Data High
Data Low
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0

2a. Absolute Indexed Indirect (a,x)
JMP
1 OpCode, 3 bytes, 6 cycles

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 0 0 0 1

##### 1 1 1 0 1 1 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR-PC+1

##### PBR-PC+2

##### PBR,PC+2

##### PBR,AA+X

##### PBR,AA+X+1

##### PBR,NEW PC

```
OpCode
AAL
AAH
IO
New PCL
New PCH
OpCode
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

2b. Absolute Indexed Indirect (a,x)
JSR
1 OpCode, 3 bytes, 8 cycles

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1

##### 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,S

##### 0,S- 1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### PBR,PC+2

##### PBR,AA+X

##### PBR,AA+X+1

##### PBR,NEW PC

```
OpCode
AAL
PCH
PCL
AAH
IO
New PCL
New PCH
Next
OpCode
```
##### 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1

3a. Absolute Indirect (a)
JML
1 OpCode, 3 bytes, 6 cycles

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 0 0 0 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### 0,AA

##### 0,AA+1

##### 0,AA+2

##### NEW PBR,PC

```
OpCode
AAL
AAH
New PCL
New PCH
New PBR
OpCode
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

3b. Absolute Indirect (a)
JMP
1 OpCode, 3 bytes, 5 cycles

##### 1 2 3 4 5 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 0 0 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### 0,AA

##### 0,AA+1

##### PBR,NEW PC

```
OpCode
AAL
AAH
New PCL
New PCH
OpCode
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1


### Table 5- 7 (continued)

```
Address Mode Note Cycl
e
```
##### VPB MLB VDA

##### (14)

##### VPA

##### (14)

```
Address Bus (15) Data Bus RWB
```
4a. Absolute Long al
ADC, AND, CMP, EOR, LDA, ORA,
SBC, STA, 8 OpCodes, 4 bytes,
5 & 6 cycles

```
(1)
```
##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

##### 4

##### 5

```
5a
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 0 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### PBR,PC+3

##### AAB,AA

##### AAB,AA+1

```
OpCode
AAL
AAH
AAB
Data Low
Data High
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1/0

##### 1/0

4b. Absolute Long (JUMP) al
JMP
1 OpCode, 4 bytes, 4 cycles

##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

##### 4

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 0

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### PBR,PC+3

```
New PBR,PC
```
```
OpCode
New PCL
New PCH
New BR
OpCode
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

4c. Absolute Long (JUMP to Subroutine
Long) al
JSL
1 OpCode, 4 bytes, 8 cycles

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### 0,S

##### 0,S

##### PBR,PC+3

##### 0,S- 1

##### 0,S- 2

```
New PBR,PC
```
```
OpCode
New PCL
New PCH
PBR
IO
New PBR
PCH
PCL
Next OpCode
```
##### 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 1

5. Absolute Long,X al,x
ADC, AND, CMP, EOR, LDA, ORA,
SBC, STA
8 OpCodes, 4 bytes, 5 and 6 cycles

```
(1)
```
##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

##### 4

##### 5

```
5a
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 0 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### PBR,PC+3

##### AAB,AA+X

##### AAB,AA+X+1

```
OpCode
AAL
AAH
AAB
Data Low
Data High
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1/0

##### 1/0

6a Absolute, X a, x
ADC, AND, BIT, CMP, EOR, LDA, LDY,
ORA, SBC, STA, STZ
12 OpCodes, 3 bytes, 4,5 and 6 cycles
(4)

```
(1)
```
##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

```
3a
4
4a
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 0 1 1

##### 1 1 1 0 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### DBR,AAH,AAL+XL

##### DBR,AA+X

##### DBR,AA+X+1

```
OpCode
AAL
AAH
IO
Data Low
Data High
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1/0

##### 1/0

6b Absolute, X(R-M-W) a,x
ASL, DEC INC LSR ROL, ROR
6 OpCodes, 3 bytes, 7 and 9 cycles

##### (1)

##### (3)(17)

##### (1)

##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

##### 4

##### 5

```
5a
6
7a
7
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0

##### 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1

##### 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### DBR,AAH,AAL+XL

##### DBR,AA+X

##### DBR,AA+X+1

##### DBR,AA+X+1

##### DBR,AA+X+1

##### DBR,AA+X

```
OpCode
AAL
AAH
IO
Data Low
Date High
IO
Data High
Data Low
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0

7. Absolute, Y a,y
ADC, AND, CMP, EOR, LDA, LDX,
ORA, SBC, STA
9 OpCodes, 3 bytes, 4,5 and 6 cycles
    (4)

```
(1)
```
##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

```
3a
4
4a
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 0 1 1

##### 1 1 1 0 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### DBR,AAH,AAL+YL

##### DBR,AA+Y

##### DBR,AA+Y+1

```
OpCode
AAL
AAH
IO
Data Low
Data High
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1/0

##### 1/0

8. Accumulator A
ASL, DEC, INC, LSR, ROL, ROR
6 OpCodes, 1 byte, 2 cycles

##### 1

##### 2

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 1

##### 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

```
OpCode
IO
```
##### 1

##### 1


### Table 5- 7 (continued)

```
Address Mode Note^ Cycle VPB MLB VDA
(14)
```
##### VPA

##### (14)

```
Address Bus
(15)
```
```
Data Bus RWB
```
```
9a. Block Move Negative
(backward) xyc
MVN
1 Op Code N- 2
3 bytes Byte
7 cycles C=2
x=Source Address
y=Destination
c=# of bytes to move- 1
x,y Increment
```
##### N- 1

Byte
C=1

```
N Byte
```
### C=0

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1

##### 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### SBA,X

##### DBA,Y

##### DBA,Y

##### DBA,Y

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### SBA,X+1

##### DBA,Y+1

##### DBA,Y+1

##### DBA,Y+1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### SBA,X+2

##### DBA,Y+2

##### DBA,Y+2

##### DBA,Y+2

##### PBR,PC+3

```
OpCode
DBA
SBA
SRC Data
Dest Data
IO
IO
OpCode
DBA
SBA
SRC Data
Dest Data
IO
IO
OpCode
DBA
SBA
SRC Data
Dest Data
IO
IO
Next
OpCode
```
##### 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1

```
9b. Block Move Positive
(forward) xyc
(MVP)
1 Op Code N- 2
3 bytes Byte
7 cycles C=2
x=Source Address
y=Destination
c=# of bytes to move- 1
x,y Decrement
MVP is used when the destination
N- 1
start address is higher (more
Byte
positive ) than the source
C=1
start address.
```
```
N Byte
Last
C=0
```
##### 000000

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1

##### 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### SBA,X

##### DBA,Y

##### DBA,Y

##### DBA,Y

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### SBA,X- 1

##### DBA,Y- 1

##### DBA,Y- 1

##### DBA,Y- 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### SBA,X- 2

##### DBA,Y- 2

##### DBA,Y- 2

##### DBA,Y- 2

##### PBR,PC+3

```
OpCode
DBA
SBA
SRC Data
Dest Data
IO
IO
OpCode
DBA
SBA
SRC Data
Dest Data
IO
IO
OP Code
DBA
SBA
SRC Data
Dest Data
IO
IO
Next
OpCode
```
##### 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1

```
Source End
```
```
Dest. End
Source
Start
Dest. Start
```
```
Destination.
Start
```
```
Source Start
Destination.
End
Source End
```
##### FFFFF

##### F

##### 000000

##### FFFFFF


### Table 5- 7 (continued)

```
Address Mode Note Cycle VPB MLB VDA
(14)
```
##### VPA

##### (14)

```
Address Bus (15) Data Bus RWB
```
10a. Direct d
ADC AND BIT, CMP, CPX, CPY ,EOR,
LDA, LDX, LDY, ORA, SBC, STA, STX,
STY, STZ
16 OpCodes, 2 bytes, 3, 4 & 5 cycles

##### (2)

##### (1)

##### 1

##### 2

```
2a
3
3a
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,D+DO

##### 0,D+DO+1

```
OpCode
DO
IO
Data Low
Data High
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1/0

##### 1/0

10b. Direct (R-M-W)d
ASL, DEC, INC, LSR, ROL, ROR, TRB,
TSB,
8 OpCodes, 2 bytes, 5,6,7 and 8 cycles

##### (2)

##### (1)

##### (3),(17)

##### (1)

##### 1

##### 2

```
2a
3
3a
4
5a
5
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0

##### 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1

##### 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0

##### PBR, PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,D+DO

##### 0,D+DO+1

##### 0,D+DO+1

##### 0,D+DO+1

##### 0,D+DO

```
OpCode
DO
IO
Data Low
Data High
IO
Data High
Data Low
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0

11. Direct Indexed Indirect (d,x)
ADC, AND, CMP, EOR, LDA, ORA,
SBC, STA,
8 OpCodes, 2 bytes, 6,7 and 8 cycles

##### (2)

##### (1)

##### 1

##### 2

```
2a
3
4
5
6
6a
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,D+DO+X

##### 0,D+DO+X+1

##### DBR,AA

##### DBR,AA+1

```
OpCode
DO
IO
IO
AAL
AAH
Data Low
Data High
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1/0

##### 1/0

12. Direct Indirect (d)
ADC, AND, CMP, EOR, LDA, ORA,
SBC. STA,
8 OpCodes 2 bytes, 5,6 and 7 cycles

##### (2)

##### (1)

##### 1

##### 2

```
2a
3
4
5
5a
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 0 0 0 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,D+DO

##### 0,D+DO+1

##### DBR,AA

##### DBR,AA+1

```
OpCode
DO
IO
AAL
AAH
Data Low
Data High
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1/0

##### 1/0

13. Direct Indirect Indexed (d),y
ADC, AND, CMP, EOR, LDA, ORA,
SBC, STA
8 OpCodes, 2 bytes, 5,6,7 and 8 cycles

##### (2)

##### (4)

##### (1)

##### 1

##### 2

```
2a
3
4
4a
5
5a
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1

##### 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,D+DO

##### 0,D+DO+1

##### DBR,AAH.AAL+YL

##### DBR,AA+Y

##### DBR,AA+Y+1

```
OpCode
DO
IO
AAL
AAH
IO
Data Low
Data High
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1/0

##### 1/0

14. Direct Indirect Indexed Long [d],y
ADC, AND, CMP, EOR, LDA, ORA, SBC,
STA
8 OpCodes, 2 bytes, 6,7 and 8 cycles

##### (2)

##### (1)

##### 1

##### 2

```
2a
3
4
5
6
6a
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,D+DO

##### 0,D+DO+1

##### 0,D+DO+2

##### AAB,AA+Y

##### AAB,AA+Y+1

```
OpCode
DO
IO
AAL
AAH
AAB
Data Low
Data High
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1/0

##### 1/0

15. Direct Indirect Long [d]
ADC, AND, CMP, EOR, LDA, ORA,
SBC, STA
8 OpCodes, 2 bytes, 6,7 and 8 cycles

##### (2)

##### (1)

##### 1

##### 2

```
2a
3
4
5
6
6a
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,D+DO

##### 0,D+DO+1

##### 0,D+DO+2

##### AAB,AA

##### AAB,AA+1

```
OpCode
DO
IO
AAL
AAH
AAB
Data Low
Data High
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1/0

##### 1/0


### Table 5- 7 (continued)

```
Address Mode Note Cycle VPB MLB VDA
(14)
```
##### VPA

##### (14)

```
Address Bus
(15)
```
```
Data Bus RWB
```
16a. Direct, X d,x
ADC, AND, BIT, CMP, EOR, LDA
LDY, ORA, SBC, STA, STY, STZ,
12 OpCodes,2 bytes, 4,5,and 6
cycles

##### (2)

##### (1)

##### 1

##### 2

```
2a
3
4
4a
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 0 1 1

##### 1 1 0 0 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,D+DO+X

##### 0,D+DO+X+1

```
OpCode
DO
IO
IO
Data Low
Data High
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1/0

##### 1/0

16b. Direct, X (R-M-W) d,x
ASL, DEC, INC, LSR, ROL, ROR,
6 OpCodes, 2 bytes, 6,7,8 and 9
cycles

##### (2)

##### (1)

##### (3),(17

##### )

##### (1)

##### 1

##### 2

```
2a
3
4
4a
5
6a
6
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0

##### 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1

##### 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,D+DO+X

##### 0,D+DO+X+1

##### 0,D+DO+X+1

##### 0,D+DO+X+1

##### 0,D+DO+X

```
OpCode
DO
IO
IO
Data Low
Data High
IO
Data High
Data Low
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0

17. Direct, Y d,y
LDX, STX
2 OpCodes, 2 bytes, 4,5 and 6
cycles

##### (2)

##### (1)

##### 1

##### 2

```
2a
3
4
4a
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 0 1 1

##### 1 1 0 0 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,D+DO+Y

##### 0,D+DO+Y+1

```
OpCode
DO
IO
IO
Data Low
Data High
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1/0

##### 1/0

18.Immediate #
ADC, AND, BIT, CMP, CPX, CPY,
EOR, LDA, LDX, LDY, ORA, REP,
SBC, SEP
14 OpCodes, 2 and 3 bytes, 2 and
3 cycles

##### (1)(8)

##### 1

##### 2

```
2a
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

```
OpCode
IDL
IDH
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

19a. Implied i
CLC, CLD, CLI, CLV, DEX, DEY,
INX, INY, NOP, SEC, SED, SEI,
TAX, TAY, TCD, TCS, TDC, TSC,
TSX, TXA, TXS, TXY, TYA, TYX,
XCE
25 OpCodes, 1 byte, 2 cycles

##### 1

##### 2

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 1

##### 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

```
OpCode
IO
```
##### 1

##### 1

19b. Implied i
XBA
1 OpCode, 1 byte, 3 cycles

##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

```
OpCode
IO
IO
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

19c. Stop the Clock
STP
1 OpCode
1 byte RESB=1
3 cycles RESB=0
RESB=0
RESB=1
(See 22a. Stack Hardware
Interrupt)

##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

```
1c
1b
1a
1
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 0 0 0 1

##### 1 0 0 0 0 0 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

```
OpCode
IO
IO
RES (BRK)
RES (BRK)
RES (BRK)
BEGIN
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

19d. Wait for Interrupt
WAI
1 OpCode,1 byte
3 cycles IRQB, NMIB

```
RDY=1
(9)RDY=1
RDY=0
RDY=1
```
##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

```
OpCode
IO
IO
IRQ(BRK)
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1


```
Table 5- 7 (continued)
Address Mode Note Cycle VPB MLB VDA
(14)
```
##### VPA

##### (14)

```
Address Bus
(15)
```
```
Data Bus RWB
```
20. Relative r
BCC, BCS, BEQ, BMI, BNE, BPL, BRA,
BVC,BVS
9 OpCodes, 2 bytes, 2,3 and 4 cycles

##### (5)

##### (6)

##### 1

##### 2

```
2a
2b
1
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 0

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

```
PBR,PC+Offset
```
```
OpCode
Offset
IO
IO
OpCode
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

21. Relative Long rl
BRL
1 OpCode, 3 bytes, 4 cycles

##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

##### 4

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 0

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### PBR,PC+2

```
PBR,PC+Offset
```
```
OpCode
Offset Low
Offset High
IO
OpCode
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

22a. Stack s
ABORT, IRQ, NMI, RES
4 hardware interrupts
0 bytes, 7 and 8 cycles

##### (3)

##### (7)

##### (10)

##### (10)

##### (10)

##### (11)

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC

##### 0,S

##### 0,S- 1

##### 0,S- 2

##### 0.S- 3

##### 0,VA

##### 0,VA+1

##### 0,AAV

##### IO

##### IO

##### PBR

##### PCH

##### PCL

##### P

##### AAVL

##### AAVH

```
Next OpCode
```
##### 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1

22b. Stack s
PLA, PLB, PLD, PLP, PLX, PLY
Different than N6502
6 Op Codes,1 byte, 4 and 5 cycles
(1)

##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

##### 4

```
4a
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 0

##### 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,S+1

##### 0,S+2

```
OpCode
IO
IO
REG Low
REG High
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

22c. Stack s
PHA, PHB PHP, PHD, PHK, PHX, PHY
7 Op Codes, 1 byte, 3 and 4 cycles

##### (1)

##### (12)

##### 1

##### 2

```
3a
3
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,S

##### 0,S- 1

```
OpCode
IO
REG High
REG Low
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

22d. Stack s
PEA
1 Op Code, 3 bytes, 5 cycles

##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

##### 4

##### 5

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### 0,S

##### 0,S- 1

```
OpCode
AAL
AAH
AAH
AAL
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

22e. Stack s
PEI
1 Op Code, 2 bytes, 6 and 7 cycles
(2)

##### 1

##### 2

```
2a
3
4
5
6
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 0 0 0 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,D+DO

##### 0,D+DO+1

##### 0,S

##### 0,S- 1

```
OpCode
DO
IO
AAL
AAH
AAH
AAL
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 0 0

22f. Stack s
PER
1 Op Code, 3 bytes, 6 cycles

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 0 1 1

##### 1 1 1 0 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+2

##### PBR,PC+2

##### 0,S

##### 0,S- 1

```
OpCode
Offset Low
Offset High
IO
PCH+Offset+Carry
PCL+Offset
```
##### 1 1 1 1 0 0


### Table 5- 7 (continued)

```
Address Mode Note Cycle VPB MLB VDA
(14)
```
##### VPA

##### (14)

```
Address Bus
(15)
```
```
Data Bus RWB
```
22g. Stack s
RTI
1 Op Code, 1 byte, 6 and 7 cycles
(different order fromN6502)

##### (3)

##### (7)

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,S+1

##### 0,S+2

##### 0,S+3

##### 0,S+4

```
PBR,New PC
```
```
OpCode
IO
IO
P
New PCL
New PCH
PBR
Next
OpCode
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

22h. Stack s
RTS
1 OpCode, 1 byte, 6 cycles

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 1 1 0 1

##### 1 0 0 0 0 0 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,S+1

##### 0,S+2

##### 0,S+2

##### PBR,PC

```
OpCode
IO
IO
PCL
PCH
IO
OpCode
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

22i. Stack s
RTL
1 Op Code, 1 byte, 6 cycles

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 0 0 0 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,S+1

##### 0,S+2

##### 0,S+3

##### NEW PBR,PC

```
OpCode
IO
IO
New PCL
New PCH
New PBR
Next
OpCode
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

22j. Stack s
BRK,COP
2 OpCodes, 2 bytes
7 and 8 cycles

##### (3)

##### (7)

##### (10)

##### (10)

##### (10)

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,S

##### 0,S- 1

##### 0,S- 2

##### 0,S-3 (16)

##### 0,VA

##### 0,VA+1

##### 0,AAV

```
OpCode
Signature
PBR
PCH
PCL
P
AAVL
AAVH
Next
OpCode
```
##### 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1

23. Stack Relative d,s
ADC, AND, CMP, EOR,
LDA, ORA, SBC, STA
8 Op Codes, 2 bytes, 4 and 5 cycles
    (1)

##### 1

##### 2

##### 3

##### 4

```
4a
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 0

##### 0

##### 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,S+SO

##### 0,S+SO+1

```
OpCode
SO
IO
Data Low
Data High
```
##### 1

##### 1

##### 1

##### 1/0

##### 1/0

24. Stack Relative Indirect Indexed (d,s),y
ADC, AND, CMP, EOR, LDA, ORA, SBC,
STA
8 Op Codes, 2 bytes, 7 and 8 cycles

##### (1)

##### 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

```
7a
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1

##### 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0

##### PBR,PC

##### PBR,PC+1

##### PBR,PC+1

##### 0,S+SO

##### 0,S+SO+1

##### 0,S+SO+1

##### DBR,AA+Y

##### DBR,AA+Y+1

```
OpCode
SO
IO
AAL
AAH
IO
Data Low
Data High
```
##### 1 1 1 1 1 1

##### 1/0

##### 1/0


### Notes: Be aware that notes #4-7, 9 and 10 apply to the W65C02S and W65C816S. All other notes apply to the

### W65C816S only.

### 1. Add 1 byte (for immediate only) for M=0 or X=0 (i.e. 16-bit data), add 1 cycle for M=0 or X=0. REP, SEP are

### always 3 cycle instructions and VPA is low during the third cycle. The address bus is PC+1 during the third

### cycle.

### 2. Add 1 cycle for direct register low (DL) not equal 0.

### 3. Special case for aborting instruction. This is the last cycle which may be aborted or the Status, PBR or

### DBRregisters will be updated.

### 4. Add 1 cycle for indexing across page boundaries, or write, or X=0. When X=1 or in the emulation mode, this

### cycle contains invalid addresses.

### 5. Add 1 cycle if branch is taken.

### 6. Add 1 cycle if branch is taken across page boundaries in 6502 emulation mode (E=1).

### 7. Subtract 1 cycle for 6502 emulation mode (E=1).

### 8. Add 1 cycle for REP, SEP.

### 9. Wait at cycle 2 for 2 cycles after NMIB or IRQB active input.

### 10. RWB remains high during Reset.

### 11. BRK bit 4 equals "0" in Emulation mode.

### 12. PHP and PLP.

### 13. Some OpCodes shown are compatible only with the W65C816S.

### 14. VDA and VPA are not valid outputs on the W65C02S but are valid on the W65C816S. The two signals,

### VDA and VPA, are included to point out the upward compatibility to the W65C816S. When VDA and VPA

### are both a one level, this is equivalent to SYNC being a one level.

### 15. The PBR is only applicable to the W65C816S.

### 16. COP Latches.

### 17. In the emulation mode, during a R-M-W instruction the RWB is low during both write and modify cycles.


```
Clock
```
```
Bank Address
BA 0 - BA 7
```
##### E

##### D

##### Q

##### OE

```
573 or 373
```
##### 8

##### 8

```
Data Bus
8 D 0 - D 7
```
##### PHI 2

##### D 0 - D 7

##### BA 0 - BA 7

##### R/WB

##### W

##### 65

##### C

##### 8

##### 16

##### S

##### CE

##### B

##### DIR

##### A

```
74 x 245
```
## Figure 5- 1 Bank Address Latching Circuit


## 6 RECOMMENDED W65C816S ASSEMBLER SYNTAX STANDARDS

### 6.1 Directives

### Assembler directives are those parts of the assembly language source program which give directions to the

### assembler; this includes the definition of data area and constants within a program. This standard excludes

### any definitions of assembler directives.

### 6.2 Comments

### An assembler should provide a way to use any line of the source program as a comment. The

### recommended way of doing this is to treat any blank line, or any line that starts with a semi-colon or an

### asterisk as a comment. Other special characters may be used as well.

### 6.3 The Source Line

### Any line which causes the generation of a single W65C816S machine language instruction should be

### divided into four fields: a label field, the operation code, the operand, the comment field.

#### 6.3.1 The Label Field

### The label field begins in column one of the line. A label must start with an alphabetic character, and

### may be followed by zero or more alphanumeric characters. An assembler may define an upper limit

### on the number of characters that can be in a label, so long as that upper limit is greater than or equal

### to six characters. An assembler may limit the alphabetic characters to upper-case characters if

### desired. If lower-case characters are allowed, they should be treated as identical to their upper-case

### equivalents. Other characters may be allowed in the label, so long as their use does not conflict with

### the coding of operand fields.

#### 6.3.2 The Operation Code Field

### The operation code shall consist of a three character sequence (mnemonic) from Table 7-1. It shall

### start no sooner than column 2 of the line, or one space after the label if a label is coded.

### 6 .3.2.1 Many of the operation codes in Table 6-1 have duplicate mnemonics; when two or more

### machine language instruction has the same mnemonic, the assembler resolves the difference

### based on the operand.

### 6 .3.2.2 If an assembler allows lower-case letters in labels, it must also allow lower-case letters in

### the mnemonic. When lower-case letters are used in the mnemonic, they shall be treated as

### equivalent to the upper-case counterpart. Thus, the mnemonics LDA, lda and LdA must all be

### recognized, and are equivalent.

### 6 .3.2.3 In addition to the mnemonics shown in Table 7-1, an assembler may provide the

### alternate mnemonics shown in Table 7-1.


## Table 6-1 Alternate Mnemonics

```
WDC
Standard
```
```
Alias
```
```
BCC BLT
BCS BGE
CMP A CMA
DEC A DEA
INC A INA
JSL JSR
JML JMP
TCD TAD
TCS TAS
TDC TDA
TSC TSA
XBA SWA
```
### 6 .3.2.4 JSL should be recognized as equivalent to JSR when it is specified with a long absolute

### address forced. JML is equivalent to JMP with long addressing forced. Below are code examples

### from WDC’s assembler for JML and JMP usage.

```
00:2013: DC 56 34 JML ($123456) ;Absolute Indirect (Jump to Long Address)
00:2016: DC 56 34 JMP [$123456] ;Absolute Indirect (Jump to Long Address)
00:2019: 5C 56 34 12 JML $123456 ;Absolute Long
00:201D: 5C 56 34 12 JMP $123456 ;Absolute Long
00:2021: DC 34 12 JML ($1234) ;Absolute Indirect (Jump to Long Address)
00:2024: DC 34 12 JMP [$1234] ;Absolute Indirect (Jump to Long Address)
00:2027: 5C 34 12 00 JML $1234 ;Absolute Long
00:202B: 4C 34 12 JMP $1234 ;Absolute
00:202E: 6C 34 12 JMP ($1234) ;Absolute Indirect
00:2031: 6C 56 34 JMP ($123456) ;Absolute Indirect
00:2034: 4C 34 12 JMP $001234 ;Absolute
00:2037: 5C 34 12 00 JML $001234 ;Absolute Long
00:203B: 5C 34 12 01 JMP $011234 ;Absolute Long
```
#### 6.3.3 The Operand Field

### The operand field may start no sooner than one space after the operation code field. The

### assembler must be capable of at least twenty-four bit address calculations. The assembler should be

### capable of specifying addresses as labels, integer constants, and hexadecimal constants. The

### assembler must allow addition and subtraction in the operand field. Labels shall be recognized by the

### fact they start with alphabetic characters. Decimal numbers shall be recognized as containing only

### the decimal digits 0...9. Hexadecimal constants shall be recognized by prefixing the constant with a

### "$" character, followed by zero or more of either the decimal digits or the hexadecimal digits "A"..."F".

### If lower-case letters are allowed in the label field, then they shall also be allowed as hexadecimal

### digits.

### 6 .3.3.1 All constants, no matter what their format, shall provide at least enough precision to

### specify all values that can be represented by a twenty-four bit signed or unsigned integer

### represented in two's complement notation.

### 6 .3.3.2 Table 7-2 shows the operand formats that shall be recognized by the assembler. bol d is a

### label or value which the assembler can recognize as being less than $100. The symbol a is a label

### or value which the assembler can recognize as greater than $FF but less than $10000; the symbol

### al is a label or value that the assembler can recognize as being greater than $FFF. The symbol

### EXT is a label which cannot be located by the assembler at the time the instruction is assembled.

### Unless instructed otherwise, an assembler shall assume that EXT labels are two bytes long. The

### symbols r and rl are 8 and 16-bit signed displacements calculated by the assembler.


## Table 6-2 Address Mode Formats

### Addressing Mode Format Addressing Mode Format

Immediate #d Absolute Indexed by Y !d,y
#a d,y
#al a,y
#EXT !a,y
#<d !al,y
#<a !EXT,y
#<al EXT,y
#<EXT Absolute Long Indexed by X >d,x
#>d >a,x
#>a >al,x
#>al al,x
#>EXT >EXT,x
#^d Program Counter Relative d
#^a and Program Counter a
#^al Relative Long al
#^EXT (EXT)
Absolute !d Absolute Indirect (d)
!a (!d)
a (a)
!al (!a)
!EXT (!al)
EXT EXT
Absolute Long >d Direct Indirect (d)
>a (<a)
>al (<al)
al (<EXT)
>EXT Direct Indirect Long [d]
Direct Page d [>a]
<d [>al]
<a [>EXT]
<al Absolute Indexed (d,x)
<EXT (!d,x)
Accumulator A (a,x)
Implied Addressing (no operand) (!a,x)
Direct Indirect (d),y (!al,x)
Indexed (<d,y) (EXT,x)
(<a),y (!EXT,x)
(<al),y Stack Addressing (no operand)
(<EXT),y
Direct Indirect [d],y Stack Relative (d,s),y
Indexed Long [<d],y Indirect Indexed (<d,s),y
[<a],y (<a,s),y
[<al],y (<al,s),y
[<EXT],y (<EXT,s),y
Direct Indexed (d,x) Block Move d,d
Indirect (<d,x) d,a
(<a,x) d,al
(<al,x) d,EXT
(<EXT,x) a,d
Direct Indexed by X d,x a,a
<d,x a,al
<a,x a,EXT
<al,x al,d
<EXT,x al,a
Direct Indexed by Y d,y al,al
<d,y al,EXT
<a,y EXT,d
<al,y EXT,a
<EXT,y EXT,al
Absolute Indexed by X d,x EXT,EXT
!d,x
a,x
!a,x
!al,x
!EXT,x
EXT,x

Note: The alternate! (exclamation point) is used in place of the | (vertical bar).


### 6 .3.3.3 Note that the operand does not determine whether or not immediate address loads one

### or two bytes, this is determined by the setting of the status register. This forces the requirement

### for a directive or directives that tell the assembler to generate one or two bytes of space for

### immediate loads. The directives provided shall allow separate settings for the accumulator and

### index registers.

### 6 .3.3.4 The assembler shall use the <, >, and ^ characters after the # character in immediate

### address to specify which byte or bytes will be selected from the value of the operand. Any

### calculations in the operand must be performed before the byte selection takes place. Table 7- 3

### defines the action taken by each operand by showing the effect of the operator on an address.

### The column that shows a two byte immediate value show the bytes in the order in which they

### appear in memory. The coding of the operand is for an assembler which uses 32-bit address

### calculations, showing the way that the address should be reduced to a 24-bit value.

## Table 6-3 Byte Selection Operator

### Operand One Byte

### Result

### Two Byte

### Result

### #$01020304 04 04 03

### #<$01020304 04 04 03

### #>$01020304 03 03 02

### #^$01020304 02 02 01

### 6 .3.3.5 In any location in an operand where an address, or expression resulting in an address, can

### be coded, the assembler shall recognize the prefix characters <, |, and >, which force one byte

### (direct page), two byte (absolute) or three byte (long absolute) addressing. In cases where the

### addressing modes is not forced, the assembler shall assume that the address is two bytes unless

### the assembler is able to determine the type of addressing required by context, in which case that

### addressing mode will be used. Addresses shall be truncated without error in an addressing mode is

### forced which does not require the entire value of the address. For example, LDA $0203 and LDA

### |$010203 are completely equivalent. If the addressing mode is not forced, and the type of

### addressing cannot be determined from context, the assembler shall assume that a two byte

### address is to be used. If an instruction does not have a short addressing mode (as in LDA< which

### has no direct page indexed by Y) and a short address is used in the operand, the assembler shall

### automatically extend the address by padding the most significant bytes with zeroes in order to

### extend the address to the length needed. As with immediate address, any expression evaluation

### shall take place before the address is selected; thus, the address selection character is only used

### once, before the address of expression.

### 6 .3.3.6 The (!) exclamation point character should be supported as an alternative to the |

### (vertical bar).

### 6 .3.3.7 A long indirect address is indicated in the operand field of an instruction field of an

### instruction by surrounding the direct page address where the indirect address is found by square

### brackets; direct page addresses which contain 16 - bit addresses are indicated by being

### surrounded by parentheses.

#### 6.3.4 Comment Field

The comment field may start no sooner than one space after the operation code field or

operand field depending on instruction type.


## 7 Caveats

## Table 7-1 Caveats

### Compatibility Issue NMOS 6502 W65C02 W65C02S W65C816S

### S (Stack)

### Always Page 1, 8

### bits

### Always Page 1, 8

### bits

### Always page 1, 8

### bits

### Always page 1 8 bits

### when(E=1), 16 bits

### when E=0

### X (X Index Reg)

### Always Page 0

### Always less than

### 256 ie 8 Bits

### Always Page 0

### Always less than

### 256 ie 8 Bits

### Always Page 0

### Always less than

### 256 ie 8 Bits

### Indexed page zero

### always in page 0

### (E=1), Cross page

### (E=0)

### Y (Y Index Reg)

### Always Page 0

### Always less than

### 256 ie 8 Bits

### Always Page 0

### Always less than

### 256 ie 8 Bits

### Always Page 0

### Always less than

### 256 ie 8 Bits

### Indexed page zero

### always in page 0

### (E=1), Cross page

### (E=0)

### A (Accumulator) 8 bits 8 bits 8 bits

### 8 bits (M=1), 16 bits

### (M=0)

### (Flag Reg)

```
N, V and Z flags
invalid in decimal
mode.
D=unknown after
reset. D not modified
after interrupt
```
```
N,V and Z flags valid
in decimal mode. D=0
after reset/interrupt
```
```
N,V and Z flags valid
in decimal mode. D=0
after reset/interrupt
```
```
N,V and Z flags valid in
decimal mode. D=0 after
reset/interrupt
```
```
Timing
A.ABS,X,ASL,LSR,
ROL
with no Page
Crossing
B. Jump Indirect
Operand =XXFF
C. Branch Across
Page
D. Decimal Mode
```
```
7 cycles
```
```
5 cycles and
invalid page
crossing
4 cycles
No add. cycles
```
```
6 cycles
```
```
6 cycles
```
```
4 cycles
Add 1 cycle
```
```
6 cycles
```
```
6 cycles
```
```
4 cycles
Add 1 Cycle
```
```
7 cycles
```
```
5 cycles
```
```
4 cycles
No add. cycles
```
### BRK Vector

```
FFFE,F BRK bit=0 on
stack if IRQ, NMI
```
```
FFFE,F BRK bit=0 on
stack if IRQ, NMI
```
```
FFFE,F BRK bit=0 on
stack if IRQ, NMI
```
##### 00FFFE,F(E=1) BRK

```
bit=0 on stack if IRQ-
NMIB, ABORTB
000FFE6,7 (E=0), X=X on
stack always
```
### Interrupt or Break

### Bank Address

### Not available Not available Not available

```
PBR not pushed (E=1)
RTI, PBR, not pulled
(E-1) PRB pushed (E=0)
RTI, PBR pulled (E=0)
```
### Memory Lock (ML) Not available

### MLB=0 during

### Modify and Write

### cycles

### MLB=0 during

### Modify and Write

### cycles

### MLB=0 during Read

### Modify and Write

### cycles

### Indexed Across

### Page Boundary

### (d),y a,x a,y

### Extra read of

### invalid address

### Extra read of last

### instruction fetch

### Extra read of last

### instruction fetch

### Extra read of invalid

### address

### RDY Pulled during

### Write Cycle

### Ignored Processor stops Processor stops Processor Stops


### 7.1 Stack Addressing

### When in the Native mode, the Stack may use memory locations 000000 to 00FFFF. The effective address

### of Stack, Stack Relative, and Stack Relative Indirect Indexed addressing modes will always be within this

### range. In the Emulation mode, the Stack address range is 000100 to 0001FF. The following opcodes and

### addressing modes will increment or decrement beyond this range when accessing two or three bytes: JSL,

### JSR (a,x), PEA, PEI, PER, PHD, PLD, RTL

### 7.2 Direct Addressing

### 7 .2.1 The Direct Addressing modes are often used to access memory registers and pointers.

### The effective address generated by Direct; Direct,X and Direct,Y addressing modes will always be

### in the Native mode range 000000 to 00FFFF. When in the Emulation mode and DL equals zero,

### the direct addressing range is 000000 to 0000FF, except for [Direct] and [Direct],Y addressing

### modes and the PEI instruction which will increment from 0000FE or 0000FF into the Stack area.

### 7 .2.2 When in the Emulation mode, DH is not equal to zero, and DL is equal to zero, the direct

### addressing range is 00DH00 to 00DHFF, except for [Direct] and [Direct],Y addressing modes and

### the PEI instruction which will increment from 00DHFE or 00DHFF into the next higher page.

### 7 .2.3 When in the Emulation mode and DL is not equal to zero, the direct addressing range is

### 000000 to 00FFFF.

### 7.3 Absolute Indexed Addressing

### The Absolute Indexed addressing modes are used to address data outside the direct addressing range.

### The W65C02S addressing range is 0000 to FFFF. Indexing from page FFXX may result in a 00YY data

### fetch when using the W65C02S. In contrast, indexing from page ZZFFXX may result in ZZ+1,00YY when

### using the W65C816S.

### 7.4 ABORTB Input

### 7 .4.1 ABORTB should be held low for a period not to exceed one cycle. Also, if ABORTB is held

### low during the Abort Interrupt sequence, the Abort Interrupt will be aborted. It is not recommended

### to abort the Abort Interrupt. The ABORTB internal latch is cleared during the second cycle of the

### Abort Interrupt. Asserting the ABORTB input after the following instruction cycles will cause

### registers to be modified:

### 7 .4.1.1 Read-Modify-Write: Processor status modified if ABORTB is asserted after a modify cycle.

### 7 .4.1.2 RTI: Processor status modified if ABORTB is asserted after cycle 3.

### 7 .4.1.3 IRQB, NMIB, ABORTB BRK, COP: When ABORTB is asserted after cycle 2, PBR and

### DBR will become 00 (Emulation mode) or PBR will become 00 (Native mode).

### 7 .4.2 The ABORT Interrupt has been designed for virtual memory systems. For this reason,

### asynchronous ABORTB's may cause undesirable results due to the above conditions

### 7.5 VDA and VPA Valid Memory Address Output Signals

### When VDA or VPA are high and during all write cycles, the Address Bus is always valid. VDA and VPA

### should be used to qualify all memory cycles. Note that when VDA and VPA are both low, invalid addresses

### may be generated. The Page and Bank addresses could also be invalid. This will be due to low byte

### addition only. The cycle when only low byte addition occurs is an optional cycle for instructions which read

### memory when the Index Register consists of 8 bits. This optional cycle becomes a standard cycle for the

### Store instruction, all instructions using the 16-bit Index Register mode, and the Read-Modify-Write

### instruction when using 8- or 16-bit Index Register modes.


### 7.6 DB/BA operation when RDY is Pulled Low

### When RDY is low, the Data Bus is held in the data transfer state (i.e. PHI2 high). The Bank address

### external transparent latch should be latched on the rising edge of the PHI2 clock.

### 7.7 MX Output

### The MX output reflects the value of the M and X bits of the processor Status Register. The REP, SEP and

### PLP instructions may change the state of the M and X bits. Note that the MX output is invalid during the

### instruction cycle following REP, SEP and PLP instruction execution. This cycle is used as the opcode fetch

### cycle of the next instruction.

### 7.8 All Opcodes Function in All Modes of Operation

### 7 .8.1 It should be noted that all opcodes function in all modes of operation. However, some

### instructions and addressing modes are intended for W65C816S 24-bit addressing, and are therefore less

### useful for the emulation mode. The JSL, RTL, JMP al and JML instructions and addressing modes are

### primarily intended for W65C816S native mode use.

### 7 .8.2 The following instructions may be used with the emulation mode even though all Bank

### Addresses are forced to $00: PHK, PHB and PLB

### 7 .8.3 The following instructions have "limited" use in the Emulation mode:

### 7 .8.3.1 The REP and SEP instructions cannot modify the M and X bits when in the Emulation

### mode. In this mode the M and X bits will always be high (logic 1).

### 7 .8.3.2 MVP and MVN instructions use the X and Y Index Registers for the memory addresses.

### When in emulation mode the Source and Destination Bank addresses for MVP and MVN can only move

### data in the range 0000 to 00FF. See Programming the 65816 Manual for more information.

### 7.9 Indirect Jumps

### The JMP (a) and JML (a) instructions use the direct Bank for indirect addressing, while JMP (a,x) and JSR

### (a,x) use the Program Bank for indirect address tables.

### 7.10 Switching Modes

### When switching from the Native mode to the Emulation mode, the X and M bits of the Status Register are

### set high (logic 1), the high byte of the Stack is set to 01, and the high bytes of the X and Y Index

### Registers are set to 00. To save previous values, these bytes must always be stored before changing

### modes. Note that the low byte of the S, X and Y Registers and the low and high byte of the Accumulator

### (A and B) are not affected by a mode change.

### 7.11 How Interrupts Affect the Program Bank and the Data Bank Registers

### 7 .11.1 When in the Native mode, the Program Bank register (PBR) is cleared to 00 when a

### hardware interrupt, BRK or COP is executed. In the Native mode, previous PBR contents are automatically

### saved on Stack.

### 7 .11. 2 In Emulation Mode the PBR register is cleared to 00 when a hardware interrupt, BRK or

### COP is executed. In this case, previous contents of the PBR are not automatically saved.

### 7 .11.3 Note that a Return from Interrupt (RTI) should always be executed from the same "mode"

### which originally generated the interrupt.


### 7.12 Binary Mode

### The Binary Mode is set whenever a hardware or software interrupt is executed. The D flag within the Status

### Register is cleared to zero.

### 7.13 Wait for Interrupt (WAI) Instruction

### The WAI instruction pulls RDY low and places the processor in the WAI "low power" mode. NMIB, IRQB or

### RESB will terminate the WAI condition and transfer control to the interrupt handler routine. Note that an

### ABORTB input will abort the WAI instruction, but will not restart the processor. When the Status Register I

### flag is set (IRQB disabled) the IRQB interrupt will cause the next instruction (following the WAI instruction) to

### be executed without going to the IRQB interrupt handler. This method results in the highest speed response

### to an IRQB input. When an interrupt is received after an ABORTB which occurs during the WAI instruction,

### the processor will return to the WAI instruction. Other than RESB (highest priority), ABORTB is the next

### highest priority, followed by NMIB or IRQB interrupts.

### 7.14 Stop-the-Clock (STP) Instruction

### The STP instruction disables the PHI2 clock to all internal circuitry. When disabled, the PHI2 clock is held in

### the high state. In this case, the Data Bus will remain in the data transfer state and the Bank address will not

### be multiplexed onto the Data Bus. Upon executing the STP instruction, the RESB signal is the only input

### which can restart the processor. The processor is restarted by enabling the PHI2 clock, which occurs on the

### falling edge of the RESB input. Note that the external oscillator must be stable and operating properly

### before RESB goes high.

### 7.15 Co-Processor (COP) Signatures

### Signatures 00-7F may be user defined, while signatures 80-FF are reserved for instructions on future

### microprocessors. Contact WDC for software emulation of future microprocessor hardware functions.

### 7.16 WDM Opcode Use

### The WDM opcode may be used on future microprocessors. It performs no operation. WDM are the initials

### of William D. Mensch, Jr., the founder of WDC.

### 7.17 RDY Pulled During Write

### The NMOS 6502 does not stop during a write operation. In contrast, both the W65C02S and the

### W65C816S do stop during write operations

### 7.18 MVN and MVP Affects on the Data Bank Register

### The MVN and MVP instructions change the Data Bank Register to the value of the second byte of the

### instruction (destination bank address).


### 7.19 Interrupt Priorities

### The following interrupt priorities will be in effect should more than one interrupt occur at the same time:

### Priority

### Highest Priority 1. RESB

### Lower 2. Abortb’

### Lower 3 NMIB

### Lowest 4 IRQB

### 7.20 Transfers from 8-Bit to 16-Bit, or 16-Bit to 8-Bit Registers

### All transfers from one register to another will result in a full 16-bit output from the source register. The

### destination register size will determine the number of bits actually stored in the destination register and the

### values stored in the processor Status Register. The following are always 16-bit transfers, regardless of the

### accumulator size: TCS, TSC, TCD and TDC

### Note: PHP and PLP are always 8 bit operations.

### 7.21 Stack Transfers

### When in the Emulation mode, a 01 is forced into SH. In this case, the B Accumulator will not be loaded into

### SH during a TCS instruction. When in the Native mode, the B Accumulator is transferred to SH. Note that

### in both the Emulation and Native modes, the full 16 bits of the Stack Register are transferred to the A, B and

### C Accumulators, regardless of the state of the M bit in the Status Register.

### 7.22 BRK Instruction

### The BRK instruction for the NMOS 6502, 65C02 and 65C816 is actually a 2 byte instruction. The NMOS

### device simply skips the second byte (i.e. doesn’t care about the second byte) by incrementing the program

### counter twice. The 65C02 and 65C816 does the same thing except the assembler is looking for the second

### byte as a “signature byte”. With either device (NMOS or CMOS), the second byte is not used. It is

### important to realize that if a return from interrupt is used it will return to the location after the second or

### signature byte.

### 7.23 Accumulator switching from 8-bit to 16-bit

### Care must be taken when switching from 16-bit mode to 8-bit mode then to 16-bit mode. The B register is

### restored so that the following code shows a potential problem:

### LONGA ON

### REP #$20

### LDA #$2345

### STA MIKE

### LONGA OFF

### SEP #$20

### LDA #$01

### STA SAM

### LONGA ON

### REP #$20

### STA BOB

### Here BOB = $2301 and NOT $000V


## 8 HARD CORE MODEL

### 8.1 W65C816 Core Information

### • The W65C816S core uses the same instruction set as the W65C816S

### • The only functional difference between the W65C816S and W65C816S core is the RDY pin. The

### W65C816S RDY pin is bi-directional utilizing an active pull-up. The W65C816S core RDY

### function is split into 2 pins, RDYIN and WAITN. The WAITN output goes low when a WAI

### instruction is executed.

### • The W65C816S core will be a smaller die since the I/O buffers have been removed.

### • The outputs are the N-channel and P-channel output transistors drivers.

### • The following inputs, if not used, must be held in the high state: RDY input, IRQB, MIB, BE and

### ABORTB.

### • The timing of the W65C816S core is the same as the W65C816S.

## 9 SOFT CORE RTL MODEL

### 9.1 W65C816 Synthesizable RTL-Code in Verilog HDL

### The RTL-Code (Register Transfer Level) in Verilog is a synthesizable model. The behavior of this model is

### equivalent to the original W65C816S hard core. The W65C816S RTL-Code is available as the core model

### and the W65C816S standard chip model. The standard chip model includes the soft core and the buffer

### ring in RTL-Code. Synthesizable cores are useful in ASIC design.


## 10 ORDERING INFORMATION

### Example: W65C816S6TPLG- 14

### Description W65C

### W65C = standard product

### Product Identification Number 816S

### Foundry Process 6 T

### 6=.6u 1P/2M CMOS Process

### T= TSMC Foundry

### Package PL

### P = Plastic Dual-In-Line, 40 pins

### PL = Plastic Leaded Chip Carrier, 44 pins

### Q = Quad Flat Pack, 44 pins

### RoHS/Green Compliance G^

### G = RoHS/Green Compliant (Wafer and Packaging)

### Temperature/Processing

### - 40°C to + 85°C

### Speed Designator - 14

### - 14 = 14MHz

### To receive general sales or technical support on standard product or information about our module library

### licenses, contact us at:

### The Western Design Center, Inc.

### 2166 East Brown Road

### Mesa, Arizona 85213 USA

### Phone: 480- 962 - 4545 Fax: 480- 835 - 6442

### Info@WesternDesignCenter.com

### http://www.WDC65xx.com

### http://www.WesternDesignCenter.com

### ______________________________________________________________________

### WARNING: MOS CIRCUITS ARE SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM STATIC DISCHARGE

### Internal static discharge circuits are provided to minimize part damage due to environmental static electrical

### charge build-ups. Industry established recommendations for handling MOS circuits include:

### 1. Ship and store product in conductive shipping tubes or conductive foam plastic. Never ship or store

### product in non-conductive plastic containers or non-conductive plastic foam material.

### 2. Handle MOS parts only at conductive work stations.

3. Ground all assembly and repair tools.


